Title: SiT: Symmetry-Invariant Transformers for Generalisation in Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=SWrwurHAeq

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# SiT: Symmetry-Invariant Transformers for Generalisation in Reinforcement Learning 

Matthias Weissenbacher 1 Rishabh Agarwal * 2 Yoshinobu Kawahara * 1 3 

## Abstract 

An open challenge in reinforcement learning (RL) is the effective deployment of a trained policy to new or slightly different situations as well as semantically-similar environments. We introduce 

Symmetry-Invariant Transformer (SiT), a scal-able vision transformer (ViT) that leverages both local and global data patterns in a self-supervised manner to improve generalisation. Central to our approach is Graph Symmetric Attention, which refines the traditional self-attention mechanism to preserve graph symmetries, resulting in invariant and equivariant latent representations. We show-case SiT’s superior generalization over ViTs on MiniGrid and Procgen RL benchmarks, and its sample efficiency on Atari 100k and CIFAR10. 

## 1. Introduction 

Despite recent advances in reinforcement learning, out-of-distribution generalization remains an open challenge. A widely-used approach to improve generalisation in image-based RL is data augmentation (Laskin et al., 2020; Yarats et al., 2021b; Hansen & Wang, 2021) but it can lead to over regularisation to specific augmentations. Moreover, data augmentation’s inherent non-determinism can amplify the variance in regression targets, which can be detrimental to learning (Hansen et al., 2021). Complimentary to data augmentation, leveraging symmetries can improve general-ization and lead to sample-efficient RL (Tang & Ha, 2021; Van der Pol et al., 2020; Weissenbacher et al., 2022). Image-based RL may benefit from both local and global symmetries, which preserve a particular structure or prop-              

> *Advisory role 1RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan 2Google DeepMind 3Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University, Japan. Correspondence to: Matthias Weissenbacher <wb-matthias@gmail.com>.
> Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning , Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

erty within a neighborhood of a pixel or image patches and throughout the entire image respectively. Enforcing local symmetries through data augmentation is sample inefficient and computationally expensive. When an image is divided into local patches to capture these symmetries, the number of augmented samples we may need to represent all possible variations grows exponentially. Given the prevalence of symmetries in RL settings, it is advantageous for neural net-works to possess the capability to develop a understanding of these local and global symmetries in a self-supervised manner that is data-driven. However, leveraging symmetries in RL presents various challenges. In particular, an agent’s action choices in gen-eral are not invariant under symmetries both globally and locally, see Figure 1. Permutation invariance (Tang & Ha, 2021) in Figure 1 (a) admits the shortcoming that it leads to dead-end situations in many settings, while local and global flip symmetries (b) inter-changes left /right and up / down actions. Moreover, in many scenarios, it’s essential for a decision-making process to consider the local context within the broader global setting, e.g., in Figure 1 (c), the global 90 ◦ rotation is an exact symmetry but local patch-wise rotations change the neighbourhood of the agent. In contrast, even minimal permutations are fatal for learning, see Figure 1 (a) bottom-right. This situation is common amongst many games and real-world environments (Belle-mare et al., 2012; Cobbe et al., 2020; Silver et al., 2016; Bellemare et al., 2020; Kitano et al., 1997). To address the aforementioned challenges, we present a self-attention based network architecture, which we call 

Symmetry-invariant Transformer (SiT). SiTs incorporates a flexible relational inductive bias (Battaglia et al., 2018) to recognize relational patterns or symmetries, enabling it to adapt effectively to unfamiliar or out-of-distribution data. In addition to invariance, SiTs account for dead-end situ-ations by incorporating equivariance, which refers to the property of an action to transform equivalently as the states under symmetries in our SiT module and by introducing a rotation symmetry preserving but flip-symmetry breaking layer. Additionally, we introduce novel invariant as well as equivariant Graph Symmetric Attention (GSA). GSA is akin to self-attention of Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Doso-1Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size      

> (a) Original (top-left) vs. patch and pixel-wise permutations. Permutation result in non-solvable domains; e.g. permuting 6 in-dividual patches (bottom-right).
> (b) Horizontal and vertical flips; patch-wise (top) - entire image (bottom). Ap-proximate symmetry as it breaks left / right actions.
> (c) Left and right rotations by 90 ◦. Patch-wise (top): agent’s local neighbourhood altered; Entire image: global exact sym-metry (bottom).
> Figure 1. Local (patch-wise) and global transformations of observations of the CaveFlyer environment, Procgen suite (Cobbe et al., 2020). Permutation invariant agents (Tang & Ha, 2021) can’t discern key features (a) in contrast to agents with local and/or global flip and rotation invariance (b) and (c).

vitskiy et al., 2020), by adapting permutation-invariant self-attention (Lee et al., 2019) to maintain graph symmetries. SiTs capitalize on the interplay between local and global information. This is achieved by incorporating both local and global GSA modules. In particular, the local attention window stretches over several image patches, such that the local symmetries do not change the agent’s local broader neighbourhood. We demonstrate the efficacy of SiTs over ViTs on prevalent RL generalization benchmarks, namely MiniGrid and Procgen, and show sample-efficiency on the the Atari100k and CIFAR-10 vision benchmark. In summary, our contribution is fourfold. First, we introduce a scalable invariant / equivariant transformer architecture (SiT), i.e. accounting for symmetries down to the pixel level (Section 4). Second, we perform empirical model eval-uation on RL tasks; in contrast to conventional ViTs, SiTs require less hyper-parameter tuning, generalise better in RL tasks and are more sample-efficient. Specifically, SiTs lead to a 3× and 9× improvement in performance on commonly-used MiniGrid and Procgen environments. Third, SiTs in-corporate a novel method to account for the interplay of local and global symmetries, which is complementary to widely-used data augmentation in image-based RL. Fourth, GSA is a novel approach to accomplish graph-symmetries in self-attention, not relying on positional embeddings (Fuchs et al., 2020; Romero & Cordonnier, 2021). We open sourced the SiT model-code on GitHub . 

## 2. Background 

Reinforcement Learning. A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a mathematical framework for modeling decision-making problems in stochastic environments. MDPs are characterized by a tuple (S, A, P, R, γ ), where S is a fi-nite set of states, A is a finite set of actions, P is the transition probability function, R is the reward function, and γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor. In RL, one aims to learn optimal decision-making policies in MDPs. A pol-icy, denoted as π : S → A , is a mapping from states to actions. The optimal policy π maximizes the expected cumulative discounted reward, given by the value func-tion V π (s) = E [P∞ 

> t=0

γtR(st, a t) | s0 = s, a t ∼ π( |st)] ,where the expectation is taken over the sequence of states and actions encountered by following the policy π. The optimal policy π∗ is the one that satisfies V π∗

(s) ≥ V π (s)

for all s ∈ S and any other policy π.

Invariance and Equivariance . Invariance and equivariance are foundational concepts in understanding how functions respond to symmetries of their inputs. In RL, equivari-ance and invariance properties are imposed on the actor and value networks, e.g. in (Wang et al., 2023) on top of SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Before defining these concepts, we introduce some notation. The function f maps elements from space S to S′ and g denotes an individual transfor-mation in a symmetry group. The functions ρ(g) and ρ′(g)

describe the action of g on spaces S and S′, respectively, e.g. ρ(g) · s signifies applying a transformation ρ(g) on an element s of S.

Invariance: A function f is invariant with respect to a set of transformations (symmetry group) if the application of any transformation from this set to its input does not change the function’s output. Mathematically, this is expressed as: 

f (ρ(g) · s) = f (s) for every transformation g. Equivari-ance: A function f is equivariant if, when a transformation is applied to its input, there is a corresponding and pre-dictable transformation of its output. This relationship is 2Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

captured by the equation: f (ρ(g) · s) = ρ′(g) · f (s) for every transformation g in the symmetry group. 

Attention mechanisms. Recently, conventional self-attention have been employed in the context of RL agents (Tang & Ha, 2021). The permutation invariant self-attention layer (Lee et al., 2019) uses a fixed Q-matrix (queries). The original ViT architecture (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) natu-rally admits permutation invariance (PI) due to use of token embeddings. PI is only broken by using the positional em-bedding (Romero & Cordonnier, 2021; Fuchs et al., 2020). The standard attention is given by Att (K, V, Q ) = softmax 

 1√df

Q K T 

V , (1) where K, V , and Q denote the keys, values, and queries respectively. They are derived from the input X: K =

XW k, V = XW v , Q = XW q , where W q , W k, and W v

are the corresponding weight matrices. The keys and values are constructed based on the input data, which is segmented into P patches. Consequently, the matrices K, V , and Q

have dimensions RP ×df , where df represents the feature dimension for each patch. Graph neural networks and graph attention have been ex-tensively explored in terms of their symmetries (Veliˇ ckovi´ cet al., 2018; Satorras et al., 2021b). At a high-level, the graph attention mechanism (GAT) determines the relation-ships between nodes in a graph using attention. The atten-tion matrix equation 1 is masked with the adjacency matrix 

G to ensure that the attention coefficients are only computed for nodes that are connected in the graph GAT (K, V, Q ) = softmax 

 1√df

Q K T 

G V, (2) with K, V, Q being the feature vectors of the nodes, multi-plied with weight matrices. A symmetrisation of the score matrix may be added. 1 to ensure that connections between nodes are bidirectional, meaning their importance is consis-tent regardless of direction. 

## 3. GSA: Symmetry-Invariant and Equivariant Attention 

In this work, we propose a modification of the permutation invariant attention layer (Lee et al., 2019). This adaptation is specifically designed to respect the inherent symmetries of a square two-dimensional grid, which serves as our underly-ing graph structure. These symmetries include translations, rotations, and flips, as depicted in Figure 2. Our approach is an evolution of the rotary embedding method (Su et al.,              

> 1Symmetrisation over the node / vertex indices given by symmetric (M) = Mij +Mji for i, j = 1 , . . . , P for a square matrix M∈RP×P.

2021). Our Graph Symmetric Attention (GSA) layer is con-ceptually similar to a traditional graph-adjacency matrix. Our graph topology matrix G is the analog of the adjacency matrix in equation 2 ; however, its trainable weights are uniquely constrained to abide by certain symmetry condi-tions, which we discuss later. While our discussion centers on the 2D grid, GSA may be adapted to 1D data where it ensures shift-symmetry (optionally flip-symmetry), see A.1. For clarity, imagine a 9 × 9 pixel image. When segmented into 3 × 3 pixel patches, we get 9 distinct patches. In the 

local GSA setup, each graph vertex corresponds to an indi-vidual pixel, suggesting that in Figure 2, the term "patches" is synonymous with pixels. In contrast, the global GSA interprets the image as a collection of 3 × 3 patches, where each patch’s central point is symbolized by a graph vertex, aligning with the conventional ViT perspective. Taking in-spiration from self-attention in graphs, we propose Graph 

Symmetric Attention (GSA): GSA (K, V, Q ) = softmax 

 1√df

Γ( Q, K )



Gv V (3) with the attention score matrix given by 

Γ( Q, K ) = symmetric 

   Gq Q [ Gk K ]T  ⊙ G



,

where ⊙ is the point-wise Hadamard product. Here, Γ is in-terpreted as the attention graph matrix of the underlying 2D pixel grid. Analogous to equation 2, the grid symmetries are imposed by a graph topology matrix G which breaks permu-tation invariance of the standard self-attention (equation 1). Assuming that the image is split into P patches, the graph matrices Gk,v,q ∈ RP ×P ×df and G ∈ RP ×P ×# heads are to be chosen for each feature/head from either of the differ-ent symmetry preserving graph matrices depicted in Figure 2. The matrix and point-wise multiplication in equation 3 is applied per each feature and head dimension, respectively. In Figure 2, we highlight variants of a 2D grid topology matrix G preserving different symmetries, where same col-ors represent a shared weight. For example, when using horizontal in 2a, vertices and edges of the same color are transformed into each other, creating a symmetry. Other transformations do not produce this effect. Now, we define G formally. For more technical details, see Appendix A. As-sume that the distances are measured w.r.t. a specific vertex, e.g. the center one in Figure 2, and edges can be viewed as vectors. Then, pick G ∈ RP ×P such that a shared weight is present in G:• 2(a). When horizontal component of edges have the same magnitude (Horizontal flip-preserving) • 2(b). When the magnitude of the edges is same (Horizon-tal and vertical flip-preserving) • 2(c). When the distance between vertices is consistent. (Rotation preserving) 3Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size G =                   

> ith row contains edges from vertex i to all other vertices
> (a) Horizontally flip symmetry preserving Graph matrix. Its i th column is given by the horizontally flip symmetric graph centered around the i th patch vertex (here i= 5 ).
> (b) Horizontal and vertical flip pre-serving graph. Additional rotation invariance requires green = yellow.
> (c) Rotation preserving. Flip symmetry broken by sum over directed triangle sub-graphs.
> Figure 2. Composition choices of the graph matrix G∈RP×Pfor P= 9 to preserve different symmetries. Same colours in Grepresent shared weights. In (c) flips change the orientation of directed triangles i.e. clockwise to anti-clockwise while 90 ◦-rotations preserve it.

Flip symmetry breaking layer which preserves rotation symmetry. To preserve meaning of the direction of the agent (Zhao et al., 2023), it is imperative to break flip-symmetries, as such symmetries interchange the sense of left / right or up / down. To do so, we consider directed triangle sub-graphs. In Figure 2(c), flips and rotation acting are symmetries as they map the graph G to itself. However, the directed triangle changes orientations from clock-wise to counter-clockwise for flips, while it remains the same for rotations. Applying this insight to the attention score matrix Γ one breaks flip symmetry and preserves the rota-tion symmetry by summing over distinct directed triangle sub-graphs 

Γrot (Q, K )ij = Θ(i→j→k) Γ( Q, K )ij (4) 

+ Θ(j→k→i) Γ( Q, K )jk + Θ (k→i→j) Γ( Q, K )ki ,

where Θ(j→k→i) are shared weights if the triangle angels are the same; for vertices j, k, i . The resulting new graph score matrix Γrot distinguishes between flips of the input data, but is invariant under 90 ◦ left and right rotations. 

Proposition 3.1 (Symmetry Guarantee) The GSA mecha-nism (equation 3) represents a symmetry-preserving module. It may be both invariant and/or equivariant w.r.t. symme-tries of the input. The corresponding symmetry is dictated by the various graph selections. To achieve rotation invari-ance, the subsequent application of equation 4 is necessary. For invariance the token embedding i.e. the artificial (P-1) th patch is utilized at the output. Due to this mechanism, self-attention (equation 1) is permutation invariant. Equiv-ariance is achieved for the P-dimensional patch information of the output, i.e. not related to the token embedding. 

Explicit & Adaptive Symmetry Breaking . The graph ma-trices G and Gk,v,q at weight initialisation explicitly break the symmetry of self-attention from permutation invari-ance (PI) or equivariance (PE) to the respective choice, see Figure 2. However, PI or PE may be approximately recov-ered by GSA during training in a self-supervised manner, as it corresponds simply to the identity matrix G, G k,v,q , = 1.E.g. in Figure 2(b), rotation invariance is obtained if the yellow weights approximate the green ones. As far as we know, this symmetry-preserving GSA has not appeared previously. Prior work (Fuchs et al., 2020; Romero & Cordonnier, 2021) discuss only modification of the positional embedding. The latter, is entirely omitted by our approach. Symmetries in (Fuchs et al., 2020; Romero & Cordonnier, 2021) are imposed by addition of the positional embedding to the input, however each subsequent attention layer is still PI invariant w.r.t. to its respective inputs. In contrast, in our approach each GSA layer is individually able to reduce PI invariance to graph symmetries and is thus able to infer spatial 2D information of latent features. 

## 4. Symmetry-Invariant and Equivariant Transformers 

Symmetry invariant transformer ( SiT ) is a vision trans-former that employs the GSA mechanism (equation 3), and optionally equation 4, both locally as well as globally. See Figure 3 for a visualization. We refer to attention applied to entire image patches as “global”. On the other hand, “local” attention is applied to a specific patch or its surrounding neighborhood. Invariance is obtained by the same mechanism as the permutation-invariance of self-attention, i.e. the token-embedding is added as the (P+1) th patch to the input. Since the token embedding does not change under transformations of the input data, the transformer model remains invariant if only the token embedding is considered at the output. In contrast, the representation along the patch dimensions changes under symmetry transformations of the input; how-ever there is a specific way in which one can trace that property throughout the transformer model; we refer to the latter as the equivariant patch-representation. For a more formal argument, please see appendix E. Based on the above discussion, an invariant SiT forward 4Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size Divide the P local neighborhoods in N local Patches (usually N = #pixels)          

> Token Embedding Local
> GSA Block - (N+1) attention window
> Invariant Token Emb. Equivariant N-patches
> GSA Block - (P+1) attention window
> Invariant Token Emb. Equivariant P-patches
> Token Embedding Global
> OUTPUT
> Choice and / or
> Choice and / or
> Globally invariant and/or equivariant Locally invariant and/or equivariant
> Local Transformer
> Global Transformer
> INPUT
> Divided into P patches
> For each of the P patches attach the neighbouring patches within a certain window size
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Choice and / or

Figure 3. SiT model architecture wit local and global GSA modules. 

propagates only the symmetry-invariant token embedding to subsequent layers. In contrast, equivariant SiT ( SeT ) for-ward propagates the equivariant patch-representation both locally and globally. Symmetry-invariant-equivariant Trans-former ( SieTs ) is both local and global invariant and equiv-ariant. The global symmetry are a result of the local at-tention and the global attention mechanism. For example, a global 90 ◦ rotation is can be thought of as the rotation of the position of the patches (global GSA symmetry) and additionally local rotation of every single patch on pixel level (local GSA symmetry), see Figure 10. 

SiT with Preservation of Directions . Since all flips alter the interpretation of left/right and up/down, only local and global rotation-invariant SiTs maintain the agent’s meaning of direction. Additionally, Figure 1(c) illustrates that the agent’s surroundings shift with local patch rotations. To ad-dress this challenge, we enlarge the local attention window across multiple patches. This "softly" breaks local symme-tries, hence, only the global rotation persists as an exact symmetry in our empirically tested invariant SiT version in section 5, the one most fitting for RL tasks. Nonethe-less, local symmetries may be restored during training in a self-supervised manner. 

Graph Symmetric Dropout : A conventional dropout func-tion - likely required for large SiT models - breaks the inductive bias explicitly. We introduce graph symmetric dropout which preserves the symmetry of SiT. A symmetry preserving dropout for the GSA layer is obtained by setting specific shared weights in the graph matrices G, G k,v,q to zero. This statement follows from proposition 3.1. 

4.1. Scalability of SiTs 

ViTs are known to require more working memory (RAM) of the GPU than CNNs, due to the softmax operation (Dao et al., 2022). The local attention mechanism of SiTs is ap-plied to larger effective batch-sizes as the actual batch-size of the input is compounded by the number of total patches of the global attention. Using a larger local attention window only increases this overflow. In our current implementation, SiTs are 2x-5x times slower to execute than ViTs of com-parable size. However, this limitation is due to our custom implementation of our neural-net layers (GSA, graph trian-gulation) and may be resolved by a future custom CUDA implementation as SiTs can outperform ViTs that contain much larger number of trainable parameters than SiTs. Nonetheless, technical obstacles arise when scaling SiTs to larger image and batch-sizes in image-based RL envi-ronments such as Procgen. We address these by modifying the SiT implementation. First, we establish a connection between graph matrices and depth-wise convolutions with graph-weights as kernels. Secondly, to accommodate for an extended local attention window the graph matrix con-nects pixels over lager distances while the actual attention-mechanism is focused on a smaller patch. 

## 5. Empirical evaluation 

5.1. Gridworld Environment Details . The LavaCrossing environment is a standard component of MiniGrid, a Minimalistic Grid-world toolkit (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019). The primary 5Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size Train: Easy-N1   

> Train: Medium-N2
> Hard-N3
> Rotation 90°
> Rotation -90°
> Rotation 180°
> Goal top-right
> Goal bottom-right
> Random goal
> Test: Avg. Performance
> Evaluation task
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Success Rate (%)
> CNN ViT SiT

Figure 4. Comparing SiTs with CNNs and ViTs , in terms of training and generalization performance on LavaCrossing environ-ments. SiTs substantially outperform both CNNs and ViTs. Training Testing: rotated observations Testing: new goal positions  

> Agent
> Lava Goal

Figure 5. Train vs. test observations of the Mini-grid Lavacrossing (easy-N1) environment. We test generalisation of agents to varying goal and starting positions. 

objective of the agent in this environment is to reach the goal position (green square) without falling into the lava river (orange squares). The game is procedurally generated with three levels of difficulty for each map size. Therefore, this environment is suitable for evaluating the combinatorial and out-of-distribution generalization of learned policies in RL. Moreover, we test the generalisation to rotated obser-vations as well as goal changes, see (Figure 5). For further environment details see the appendix F. 

Evaluation & Results .The experiments with deep Q-learning (IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018)) here focuses on GSA with graph matrices Gk,v,q . The number of lava rivers generated in the environment is proportional to the difficulty level. We evaluate the out-of-distribution general-ization by training the agent on difficulty level 1 and 2 and testing it on levels 1 to 3 , and varying goals unseen during training (Figure 5). As shown in Figure 4, SiTs generalise better than the CNNs even on tasks which do not include rotation symmetry. For an ablation see the appendix G.2. 

5.2. Scaling SiTs: Procgen, Atari 100k & DM-control 

We demonstrate scalability of SiTs in the widely-studied Procgen benchmark (Cobbe et al., 2020), Atari 100k (Belle-mare et al., 2013; Kaiser et al., 2020) and DM-control (Tassa et al., 2018). For details of the latter see the appendix F.4 and F.3, respectively. The Procgen benchmark corresponds to a distribution of partially observable MDPs (POMDPs) 

q(m), and each level of a game corresponds to a POMDP sampled from that game’s distribution m ∼ q. The POMDP 

m is determined by the random seed used to generate the corresponding level. Following the setup from (Cobbe et al., 2020), agents are trained on a fixed set of n = 200 levels (generated using seeds from 1 to 200) and tested on the full distribution of levels (generated by sampling seeds uni-formly at random from all computer integers). We evaluate test performance on 20 different levels. Table 1 shows the results for SiT, the equivariant SeT as well as a both invariant & equivariant SieT trained with PPO (DrAC (Raileanu et al., 2020)) with crop-data augmen-tation. Sit ∗ uses two consecutive sums over triangles of the attention score matrix. Invariant SiTs perform well in environments not reflecting the symmetries of the model, e.g. Starpilot, Fruitbot, Chaser are not rotation invariant. However, the combination of invariance and equivariance of SieTs is superior. 

Results: SiT almost doubles the performance on the rota-tion invariant Caveflyer environment w.r.t. to the ResNet (620k weights) of UCB-DrAC (Raileanu et al., 2020). As UCB-Drac uses the rotational data-augmentation for train-ing, we can conclude that SiTs outperform rotational data-augmentation. Overall, our tested SiTs, SeT and SieT mod-els ( ≈ 70k weights ) substantially outperform the CNN and E2CNN (4-layers) (Weiler & Cesa, 2021) baselines with similar number of weights while perform comparably to the UCB-ResNet with 9× parameters (620k weights). No-tably, all the SiT variants obtain 7 − 9× improvements in performance compared to ViTs. 

Proof-of-concept Atari 100k and DM-control: We eval-uate our SieT model on 5 common Atari games, SpaceIn-vaders, Pong, Breakout, KungFuMaster , MsPacman, and find comparable sample-efficiency to the baseline CNN (Hessel et al., 2017; Micheli et al., 2023), see Figures 12 and 13 and Table 3. We also test 1D shift-symmetric GSA in the transformer world-model (Micheli et al., 2023), see Figure 11. DM-control: We employ SieT on top of SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) on the Walker-walk task. Without any hyper-parameter and backbone changes compared to our Procgen setup, SieT has comparable performance to the ViT baseline with > 1M weights (Hansen & Wang, 2021). 

Hyperparameter Sensitivity . The same limited h-parameter search was performed for SiTs and ViTs. Com-pared to the ResNet baseline (Raileanu et al., 2020), we employ larger batch-size 96 (instead 8) and PPO-epoch of 2 (instead 3). SiTs don’t require tuning except for the batch-size, e.g., a PPO-epoch of 3 works well too. No tuning at all on DM-control and Atari 100k. ViTs generally exhibit suboptimal performance in RL, with the notable exception of (Hansen et al., 2021; Tang & Ha, 2021). We attribute 6Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Procgen Task CNN E2CNN E2CNN ′

ViT SiT SiT ∗ SeT SieT CNN-UCB ∗ (9×)CaveFlyer 4.0% 13.4% 17.7% -1.8% 59.7 % 55.5 % 4.6% 34.5 % 18.0% StarPilot 36.3% 28.1% 29.4% 6.7% 31.3% 31.0% 38.4% 42.2 % 44.6% Fruitbot 70.8% 64.0% 66.1% 9.7% 69.8% 70.5% 68.9% 76.0% 85.8% Chaser 10.6% 13.6% 15.6% 9.0% 35.6% 45.6% 50.1% 54.0 % 44.6% Average 30.4% 29.8 % 32.2 % 5.9 % 49.1 % 50.6 % 40.5 % 51.7 % 48.2 %         

> Table 1. CNN/ViT vs. SiTs on Procgen environments: Caveflyer, Starpilot, Chaser, Fruitbot . We train with PPO (DrAC) + Crop augmentation for SiT (SiT ∗, SeT, SieT) and compare to the CNN, and E2CNN with Dihedral symmetry group (Wang et al., 2022a) (ResNet with model size 79 .4kcomparable to the SiT -65 .7k; ViT with 4-layers -216 k, E2CNN with 4-layers 70 .7k, and E2CNN ′with 4-layers 139 .2k(increased features) ). We do not alter the ResNet architecture of (Raileanu et al., 2020) but chose the same hidden-size of 64 as for the SiT as well reduce the number of channels to [4,8,16]. We train over 25M steps. Following Agarwal et al. (2021b), we report the min-max normalized score that shows how far we are from maximum achievable performance on each environment. All scores are computed by averaging over both the 4 seeds and over the 23M-25M test-steps. The UCB-DrAC results with Impala-CNN( ×4) ResNet with 620k parameters are taken from (Raileanu et al., 2020).

this that ViTs are less sample-efficient and require different hyperparameter compared to CNNs. As Vits are compute extensive hyperparameter search is practically infeasible. 

SiTs are applicable to RL tasks as they alleviate both of these caveats. Latent representation analysis: In Figure 6, we present a principal component analysis (PCA) of the latent represen-tation of the policy SiT model. While local symmetries and global flips have been dynamically broken during training exact symmetries of global rotation is preserved , i.e. all the data-points collapse into (nearly) identical points for the latter. As by design of SiTs, the local attention patch sym-metry - local center rot. in Figure 6 - is broken "softly" as it is relatively close to the original latent representation. Note that at weight initialisation of SiT, all of the symmetries except permutation invariance are almost exactly preserved. 

5.3. SiTs beyond RL: Vision Task Ablation 

We perform an ablation study of SiTs, SieTs compared to ViTs on a supervised vision task on the CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) see Figure 2b; firstly we com-pare G in SiT to a conventional position embedding in ViT; secondly we use our SieT model with Gk,q , G v , G = 1 to show improved sample efficiency & performance compared to ViTs (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). SiT and SieT use the horizontal flip symmetry preserving graph matrices. 

Results . The permutation invariance in ViTs is broken by the use of a positional embedding; in SiTs by the graph matrix G in Equation (3). While removing positional em-bedding to obtain local and global permutation invariance substantially degrades performance (56% test accuracy), using our graph symmetric attention (80% test accuracy) is superior to using positional embedding globally (76% test accuracy). Furthermore, Figure 7b shows that SiTs and SieTs reach same performance as ViTs but using 2 − 5×

less training epochs. We perform extensive ablations studies on the impact of patch-size changes of SiTs on CIFAR 10 in appendix H. 

5.4. Entire Procgen Suite SieT 

In this section we evaluate a smaller SieT variant ( 41k weights) on the entirety of the Procgen suite of 16 games, see Figure (8). We conclude that SieT outperforms a com-parable CNN on average over the 16 games. The lower total score compared to Table (1) is due to two main factors. First, both the tiny SieT and CNN variant do not perform on several environments in combination with DrAC. Second, the game selection in Table (1) reflects a collection of very successful environments of DrAC. 

5.5. Limitations of SiTs 

Equivariant CNN based networks (Wang et al., 2022a) have shown promise in particular in environments which admit symmetry but also where latent dynamics admit symmetries (Wang et al., 2023). At the core we provide a Transformer based alternative which outperforms E2CNN for compara-ble model sizes see Table (1). Thus in general Sit will offer benefits over CNNs in environments where at least some remnant symmetries other than shift symmetries are present - this is in accordance with our findings. Additionally, we observed benefits of SiTs in terms of their generalization performance due to unseen tasks, while performance in single-task RL on the same training and test task settings seem to be comparable to CNNs. It is worth noting that except for the Caveflyer environment, other environments in ProcGen do not admit strong symmetry properties, which would favor SiTs over CNNs off the shelf. From our ablation studies on Minigrid see appendix Ta-ble (5) we conclude that local GSA is of significant im-portance to get the performance benefits. However, as we discuss in section 4.1 “Scalability of Sit” the local GSA layer poses compute and memory challenges for application to larger model sizes and complex tasks. 7Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size original observation 

> 2D PCA

Figure 6. PCA of latent space representation of the trained SiT model after 25M steps on Procgen CaveFlyer. We display the PCA of the difference of the latent representation of augmented observations and original ones. 3D-view (left and center) - vertical separation for illustration purposes - 2D-view i.e. from above (bottom-right). SieT SiT* CNN E2CNN            

> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
> Train Steps 1e7
> Normalized Mean Epsiode Reward 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6

(a) Train (left) and test curves (right), normalized reward averaged over the StarPilot, CaveFlyer, Chaser, Fruitbot environments. 25 50 100 200 400 

> Number of Epochs (Log Scale)
> 80
> 86
> Test Accuracy
> Sample Efficiency on CIFAR-10
> ViT
> SieT
> SiT

(b) SiTs and SieTs are much more sample efficient than ViTs (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). The SieT model has 4 local GSA layers and 8 global ones. 

Figure 7. SiTs are comparable to CNNs in terms of sample efficiency on Procgen (a) and outperform conventional ViTs (b). 

Let us stress that we have evaluated SiTs (and SieTs) on a large variety of tasks, namely Minigrid, Procgen, Atari, DM-control, and CIFAR10. The major limitaion to Sits currently are the compute and memory expenses that arise in the SiT architecture from the local GSA. With increased compu-tational cost for each local GSA layer added. The latter, trade-offs for improved sample-efficiency see Figure (7b). Our work serves as a proof-of-concept for the approach and work while more efficient future custom implementation of SiTts may alleviate some of the computational cost. One specific example of failure is Procgen in the new re-buttal study see section 5.4 is that both the SieT and CNN variant do not learn the BossFight task very well. However, on the CNN side when adding more convolutional layers adequately the model starts to learn well. 

## 6. Related Work 

Symmetry is a prevalent implicit approach in deep learn-ing for designing neural networks with established equiv-ariances and invariances. The literature on symmetries in Vision Transformers (ViTs) (Fuchs et al., 2020; Romero & Cordonnier, 2021) is relatively limited compared to CNNs (Zhang & Sejnowski, 1988; LeCun et al., 1989; Zhang, 1990), recurrent neural networks (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997), graph neural net-works (Maron et al., 2019; Satorras et al., 2021a), and cap-sule networks (Sabour et al., 2017). PI in attention mech-anisms and ViTs has been examined in (Lee et al., 2019) and (Tang & Ha, 2021). In contrast, the SiT variants admit different adaptive symmetries other than PI. The Region ViT method (Chen et al., 2022) divides the feature map into local areas, where each region has tokens that attend to their local counterparts. We use global tokens and use local attention in a neighbouring subset. The method in (Wang et al., 2021) combines local and global attention to reduce complexity, focusing globally on specific windows. For us "global" means standard attention, while "local" pertains to attention within a window. 8Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size          

> (a) Mean episode test reward averaged over 16 games, and 4 seeds, respec-tively.
> (b) Normalized mean episode test reward averaged over 16 games, and 4 seeds, respectively.
> Figure 8. Empirical evaluation on entire Procgen suite i.e the reward is averaged over 16 games and standard error of SieT model ( 41k weights) and a CNN ( 40k weights) on top of DrAC with crop augmentation over 18M training steps. The CNN consist of 4 convolutions layers with channel dimensions [4 ,8,16 ,32] , respectively. The SieT model contains two local GSA layers with features [16 ,32] , and to global ones with 64 features, respectively. both the CNN and SieT policy have a hidden-size of 64.

Conventionally sample efficiency is enhanced by data aug-mentation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). Simple image aug-mentations, such as random crop (Laskin et al., 2020) or shift (Yarats et al., 2021a), can improve RL generalisation performance; in particular when combined with contrastive learning (Agarwal et al., 2021a). SiTs are complementary to data-augmentation. Algebraic symmetries in Markov Decision Processes (MDP) were initially discussed in (Balaraman & Andrew, 2004) and recently contextualized within RL in (van der Pol et al., 2020). Symmetry-based representation learning (Higgins et al., 2018) refers to the study of symmetries of the en-vironment manifested in the latent representation and was extended to environmental interactions in (Caselles-Dupré et al., 2019). These concepts were recently extended in (Rezaei-Shoshtari et al., 2022; Mondal et al., 2022). In (Weissenbacher et al., 2022), symmetries of the dynamics are inferred in a self-supervised manner; (Cheng et al., 2023) discusses time-reversal symmetry. These approaches are mostly complimentary to employing SiTs with equivari-ance/invariance which may aid the former. Numerous prior works have demonstrated the exceptional sample efficiency of RL achieved through equivariant meth-ods with CNNs (van der Pol & Welling, 2019; Wang & Wal-ters, 2022). Steerable Equivariant CNNs named E2CNNs (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Weiler & Cesa, 2021) have been widely applied to RL (Mondal et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022a). In contrast, SiTs belong to ViT paradigm, i.e. a distinct new approach to achieve invariance as well as equiv-ariance both locally and globally. Approximately equiv-ariant networks (Wang et al., 2022b) offer a flexible and adaptive approach by imposing constraints on the weights via a regularizer. Rotation invariance steerable convolution in toy-examples is discussed in (Zhao et al., 2023). SiTs start from a manifest PI and describe an implicit adaptive mechanism of breaking it and scale to relevant tasks in RL. 

## 7. Conclusions 

In this work, we introduced the Graph Symmetric Atten-tion (GSA) mechanism, a symmetry-preserving attention layer that adapts the self-attention mechanism to maintain graph symmetries. We combine GSA with ViTs to propose the novel SiT architecture. By leveraging the interplay of local and global information, SiT achieves inherent out-of-distribution generalization on RL environments. Transformers have significantly advanced natural-language-processing and vision tasks, particularly in scalability. Our work may pave the way for applying these benefits to image-based RL. Additionally, transformers facilitate integration with Large Language Models (LLMs) for multimodal ar-chitectures, highlighting their potential in future vision and language-based RL research. 9Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## Acknowledgments 

We would like express our gratitude to Yujin Tang for help-ful comments on the draft. And, we would like to thank Y. Nishimura for technical support. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Number JP22H00516), and JST CREST (Grant Number JPMJCR1913). 

## References 

Agarwal, R., Machado, M. C., Castro, P. S., and Bellemare, M. G. Contrastive behavioral similarity embeddings for generalization in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05265 , 2021a. Agarwal, R., Schwarzer, M., Castro, P. S., Courville, A. C., and Bellemare, M. Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 34:29304–29320, 2021b. Balaraman, R. and Andrew, G. B. Approximate homo-morphisms: A framework for non-exact minimization in markov decision processes. In In International Confer-ence on Knowledge Based Computer Systems , 2004. Battaglia, P. W., Hamrick, J. B., Bapst, V., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Zambaldi, V. F., Malinowski, M., Tac-chetti, A., Raposo, D., Santoro, A., Faulkner, R., Çaglar Gülçehre, Song, H. F., Ballard, A. J., Gilmer, J., Dahl, G. E., Vaswani, A., Allen, K. R., Nash, C., Langston, V., Dyer, C., Heess, N., Wierstra, D., Kohli, P., Botvinick, M., Vinyals, O., Li, Y., and Pascanu, R. Relational induc-tive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. CoRR ,abs/1806.01261, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/ abs/1806.01261 .Bellemare, M., Veness, J., and Bowling, M. Investigat-ing contingency awareness using atari 2600 games. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 26, pp. 864–871, 2012. Bellemare, M. G., Naddaf, Y., Veness, J., and Bowling, M. The arcade learning environment: An evaluation plat-form for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 47:253–279, jun 2013. Bellemare, M. G., Candido, S., Castro, P. S., Gong, J., Machado, M. C., Moitra, S., Ponda, S. S., and Wang, Z. Autonomous navigation of stratospheric balloons using reinforcement learning. Nature , 588(7836):77–82, 2020. Beyer, L., Zhai, X., and Kolesnikov, A. Better plain vit baselines for imagenet-1k, 2022. Beyer, L., Izmailov, P., Kolesnikov, A., Caron, M., Korn-blith, S., Zhai, X., Minderer, M., Tschannen, M., Alab-dulmohsin, I., and Pavetic, F. Flexivit: One model for all patch sizes, 2023. Caselles-Dupré, H., Garcia Ortiz, M., and Filliat, D. Symmetry-based disentangled representation learning re-quires interaction with environments. In Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d'Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. Chen, C.-F., Panda, R., and Fan, Q. Regionvit: Regional-to-local attention for vision transformers, 2022. Chen, L., Lu, K., Rajeswaran, A., Lee, K., Grover, A., Laskin, M., Abbeel, P., Srinivas, A., and Mordatch, I. De-cision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling, 2021. Cheng, P., Zhan, X., Wu, Z., Zhang, W., Song, S., Wang, H., Lin, Y., and Jiang, L. Look beneath the surface: Exploiting fundamental symmetry for sample-efficient offline rl, 2023. Chevalier-Boisvert, M., Bahdanau, D., Lahlou, S., Willems, L., Saharia, C., Nguyen, T. H., and Lebret, R. Babyai: First steps towards grounded language learning with a human in the loop. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Cobbe, K., Hesse, C., Hilton, J., and Schulman, J. Lever-aging procedural generation to benchmark reinforcement learning. In III, H. D. and Singh, A. (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 2048–2056. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. Cohen, T. and Welling, M. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In Balcan, M. F. and Weinberger, K. Q. (eds.), 

Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 2990–2999, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. Dao, T., Fu, D. Y., Ermon, S., Rudra, A., and Ré, C. FlashAt-tention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2022. Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., and Houlsby, N. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale, 2020. 10 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Espeholt, L., Soyer, H., Munos, R., Simonyan, K., Mnih, V., Ward, T., Doron, Y., Firoiu, V., Harley, T., Dunning, I., et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with impor-tance weighted actor-learner architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01561 , 2018. Fuchs, F., Worrall, D., Fischer, V., and Welling, M. Se(3)-transformers: 3d roto-translation equivariant attention networks. In Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., and Lin, H. (eds.), Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pp. 1970–1981. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/ 15231a7ce4ba789d13b722cc5c955834-Paper. pdf .Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Dy, J. and Krause, A. (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Ma-chine Learning Research , pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. Hansen, N. and Wang, X. Generalization in reinforcement learning by soft data augmentation. In International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation , 2021. Hansen, N., Su, H., and Wang, X. Stabilizing deep q-learning with convnets and vision transformers under data augmentation. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , 34:3680–3693, 2021. Hassani, A., Walton, S., Shah, N., Abuduweili, A., Li, J., and Shi, H. Escaping the big data paradigm with compact transformers, 2022. Hessel, M., Modayil, J., van Hasselt, H., Schaul, T., Ostro-vski, G., Dabney, W., Horgan, D., Piot, B., Azar, M., and Silver, D. Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning, 2017. Higgins, I., Amos, D., Pfau, D., Racaniere, S., Matthey, L., Rezende, D., and Lerchner, A. Towards a definition of disentangled representations, 2018. Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. 

Neural computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997. Jiang, Z., Minervin, P., Jiang, M., and Rocktäschel, T. Grid-to-graph: Flexible spatial relational inductive biases for reinforcement learning. In AAMAS 2021 , 2021. Kaiser, , Babaeizadeh, M., Milos, P., Osinski, B., Campbell, R. H., Czechowski, K., Erhan, D., Finn, C., Kozakowski, P., Levine, S., et al. Model-based reinforcement learn-ing for atari. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Kitano, H., Asada, M., Kuniyoshi, Y., Noda, I., and Osawa, E. Robocup: A challenge problem for ai and robotics. In RoboCup-97: Robot soccer world cup I , pp. 1–19. Springer, 1997. Krizhevsky, A. and Hinton, G. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, Citeseer, 2009. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,pp. 1097–1105, 2012. Küttler, H., Nardelli, N., Lavril, T., Selvatici, M., Sivakumar, V., Rocktäschel, T., and Grefenstette, E. TorchBeast: A PyTorch Platform for Distributed RL. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03552 , 2019. URL https://github. com/facebookresearch/torchbeast .Laskin, M., Lee, K., Stooke, A., Pinto, L., Abbeel, P., and Srinivas, A. Reinforcement learning with augmented data. In Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., and Lin, H. (eds.), Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pp. 19884–19895. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings. neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/ e615c82aba461681ade82da2da38004a-Paper. pdf .LeCun, Y., Boser, B. E., Denker, J. S., Henderson, D., Howard, R. E., Hubbard, W., and Jackel, L. D. Back-propagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition. 

Neural computation , 1(4):541–551, 1989. Lee, J., Lee, Y., Kim, J., Kosiorek, A., Choi, S., and Teh, Y. W. Set transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning .PMLR, 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v97/lee19d.html .Maron, H., Ben-Hamu, H., Shamir, N., and Lipman, Y. Invariant and equivariant graph networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Micheli, V., Alonso, E., and Fleuret, F. Transformers are sample-efficient world models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=vhFu1Acb0xb .Mondal, A. K., Nair, P., and Siddiqi, K. Group equivariant deep reinforcement learning, 2020. 11 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Mondal, A. K., Jain, V., Siddiqi, K., and Ravanbakhsh, S. EqR: Equivariant representations for data-efficient reinforcement learning. In Chaudhuri, K., Jegelka, S., Song, L., Szepesvari, C., Niu, G., and Sabato, S. (eds.), 

Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 15908–15926. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. Raileanu, R., Goldstein, M., Yarats, D., Kostrikov, I., and Fergus, R. Automatic data augmentation for general-ization in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12862 , 2020. Rezaei-Shoshtari, S., Zhao, R., Panangaden, P., Meger, D., and Precup, D. Continuous mdp homomorphisms and homomorphic policy gradient, 2022. Romero, D. W. and Cordonnier, J.-B. Group equiv-ariant stand-alone self-attention for vision. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=JkfYjnOEo6M .Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. Learn-ing representations by back-propagating errors. Nature ,323(6088):533–536, 1986. Sabour, S., Frosst, N., and Hinton, G. E. Dynamic routing between capsules. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 3856–3866, 2017. Satorras, V. G., Hoogeboom, E., and Welling, M. E(n)-equivariant graph neural networks. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2021a. Satorras, V. G., Hoogeboom, E., and Welling, M. E(n) equivariant graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09844 , 2021b. Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Hubert, T., Simonyan, K., Sifre, L., Schmitt, S., Guez, A., Lockhart, E., Hassabis, D., Graepel, T., et al. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature , 588(7839): 604–609, 2020. Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., van den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. 

nature , 529(7587):484–489, 2016. Su, J., Lu, Y., Pan, S., Wen, B., and Liu, Y. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. 

CoRR , abs/2104.09864, 2021. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2104.09864 .Tang, Y. and Ha, D. The sensory neuron as a trans-former: Permutation-invariant neural networks for re-inforcement learning. In Beygelzimer, A., Dauphin, Y., Liang, P., and Vaughan, J. W. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=wtLW-Amuds .Tassa, Y., Doron, Y., Muldal, A., Erez, T., Li, Y., de Las Casas, D., Budden, D., Abdolmaleki, A., Merel, J., Lefrancq, A., Lillicrap, T. P., and Riedmiller, M. A. Deepmind control suite. CoRR , abs/1801.00690, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.00690 .van der Pol, E. and Welling, M. On the benefits of invari-ance in neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Van der Pol, E., Worrall, D., van Hoof, H., Oliehoek, F., and Welling, M. Mdp homomorphic networks: Group sym-metries in reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:4199–4210, 2020. van der Pol, E., Worrall, D., van Hoof, H., Oliehoek, F., and Welling, M. Mdp homomorphic networks: Group symmetries in reinforcement learning. In Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M. F., and Lin, H. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pp. 4199–4210. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. Veliˇ ckovi´ c, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Liò, P., and Bengio, Y. Graph attention networks. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=rJXMpikCZ .Wang, D. and Walters, R. So (2) equivariant reinforce-ment learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Wang, D., Walters, R., and Platt, R. $\mathrm{SO}(2)$-equivariant reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= 7F9cOhdvfk_ .Wang, D., Park, J. Y., Sortur, N., Wong, L. L., Walters, R., and Platt, R. The surprising effectiveness of equivariant models in domains with latent symmetry. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=P4MUGRM4Acu .Wang, R., Walters, R., and Yu, R. Approximately equiv-ariant networks for imperfectly symmetric dynamics. In Chaudhuri, K., Jegelka, S., Song, L., Szepesvari, C., Niu, G., and Sabato, S. (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , volume 162 12 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research . PMLR, 2022b. Wang, W., Yao, L., Chen, L., Lin, B., Cai, D., He, X., and Liu, W. Crossformer: A versatile vision transformer hinging on cross-scale attention, 2021. Weiler, M. and Cesa, G. General e(2) -equivariant steerable cnns, 2021. Weissenbacher, M., Sinha, S., Garg, A., and Kawahara, Y. Koopman q-learning: Offline reinforcement learning via symmetries of dynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 23645–23667. PMLR, 2022. Yarats, D., Kostrikov, I., and Fergus, R. Data-efficient reinforcement learning with momentum predictive rep-resentations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021a. Yarats, D., Kostrikov, I., and Fergus, R. Image aug-mentation is all you need: Regularizing deep reinforce-ment learning from pixels. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021b. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=GY6-6sTvGaf .Ye, D., Liu, S., Tian, Y., and Liu, Q. Mastering atari games with limited data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, 2021. Zhang, K. Interpreting the internal vector representation of an analogical neural network. In Proceedings of the 12th annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society , pp. 684–691. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1990. Zhang, K. and Sejnowski, T. J. Parallel distributed process-ing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol. 1. In Foundations . MIT Press, 1988. Zhao, L., Zhu, X., Kong, L., Walters, R., and Wong, L. L. In-tegrating symmetry into differentiable planning with steer-able convolutions. In The Eleventh International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=n7CPzMPKQl .

## A. Overview of Definitions: Graph Symmetric Attention Mechanism 

We propose the following Graph Symmetric 

Attention (GSA) mechanism in equation 11. Where 

G, G k,v,q , G kq,b ∈ RP ×P being the graph ma-trices described in figure 2 and σ is an activation function . The color coding refers to different conceptual implementations, which may be used in combination. When using token embeddings 

K, V, Q, ∈ RP +1 ×df thus Gk,v,q ∈ RP +1 ×P +1 ×df

and G, G kq,b ∈ RP +1 ×P +1 ×#heads . In particular, that implies that we apply a different set of graph weights to the feature and head dimensions. See Figure (9) for a visualisation. Moreover, we propose the a second variant of the GSA a−sym of our attention mechanism which replaces the attention matrix as softmax 

 1√dq

sym   Γ( Q, K ) 

(6) 

+ softmax 

 1√dq

a-sym   Γ( Q, K )  

where we symmetrise and anti-symmetrises over the patch indices of Γ( Q, K ) respectively, the latter is as in equa-tion 3; and a-sym refers to replacing the symmetrisation in equation 11 by anti-symmetrisation. Anti-symmetrisation of a matrix M refers to Mij → Mij − Mji .

Empirical Evaluation Omission Overview: 

• On our grid-world environment experiments we found qualitatively that the variants Gkq,b , G required more h-parameter tuning to show comparable performance to the CNN baseline. We thus removed a quantitative analysis from the paper. 2

• Adding the anti-symmetrisation equation 6 to the ar-chitecture increased generalisation performance on the grid-world environment. However, it requires two soft-max operation, which renders it hard to scale; we thus removed a quantitative analysis from the paper. 

More formally of can define e.g. G in Figure 2 (c). Pick G ∈ RP ×P such that it admits a shared weight if the distance between vertices is the same. For more technical details see the appendix A More formally, 

Gij = θ(κ) , i, j = 1 , .., P with weights θ with labels 

κ = 1 , .., #( unique edge lengths of 2D grid graph ). The ele-ment Gij corresponds to the edge between the ith and jth 

vertex, i.e. the assigned weight index κ is identical if and     

> 2Let us stress that both Gand Gv,k,q are indeed sufficient to break symmetries, respectively, i.e. to achieve the desired equivari-ance.

13 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size Token Embedding   

> GSA (P+1) attn. window
> OUTPUT invariant and/or equivariant
> INPUT
> Divided into P patches
> Layer Norm
> +

…

> ith row contains edges from vertex i to all other vertices

…                    

> Graph-matrix G
> G.QFeature-wise independent G
> Weight matrices W, input X : Q = X .Wq, K = X .Wk, V = X .Wv
> Token Embedding
> Queries (Q)
> Values (V)
> concatenate
> attn = softmax( symmetrize( Q .KT) )
> Keys (K)
> attn .V
> Invariant Token Emb. Equivariant P-patches
> Choice and / or
> ith row contains edges from vertex i to neighbouring vertices, elsewise zeros
> zeros

……

> Equivalence matrix product with G & depthwise convolutions

. matrix-product 

=

=

> Convolution kernel
> Applied to 2D image

Figure 9. GSA module architecture (left), and equivalence of graph matrix and depth-wise convolutions (right). The GSA layer includes Layer-Norm and additive skip connection in addition to the GSA module. We display the GSA variant Gk,v,q with Gk,v = 1 .

GSA (K, V, Q ) = softmax 

 1√dq

Γ( Q, K )  Gv V (5) with Γ( Q, K ) = symmetric 



σ



Gqk 

  Gq Q [ Gk K ]T  + Gb



⊙ G



.

only if the distance between the ith and jth vertex is the same. 

Rotational Symmetry. To ensure that the layer solely possesses rotational symmetry, it is essential to disrupt the flip symmetry. This can be accomplished by selecting flip and rotational graph matrices, as depicted in fig. 2 (c), and summing over distinct directed subgraphs with three vertices, i.e., triangles, while assigning weights to each contribution see equation 7. In essence, this implies that for any component of 

Γ( Q, K )edge , two additional entries are added, all weighted with Θ′s. The Θ′s are trainable parameters, which will be shared if the angle between two edges of the triangle is identical. In equation 4, the third vertex of the triangle is chosen as a function of i, j 7 → k = T (i, j ) for a unique map 

T ; the weights Θ′s are shared if the angle between edges of the triangle in the square grid is identical. The label 

(i → j → k) denotes the angle at the jth vertex i.e. between the (ij ) and (jk ) edge. In essence, this implies that for any of the P 2-components of Γ( Q, K ), two additional entries are added, all weighted with Θ′s.A unique triangulation of the square grid is be chosen as follows. Disregarding the heads-dimension for the time being, any entry of the matrix Γ( Q, K ) can be construed as a connection between a specific patch and another, thereby enabling the drawing of an edge from the former to the latter. This forms the initial directed edge of the triangle, linking two vertices. From the end of the latter, we opt to turn right 14 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

GSA rot (K, V, Q ) = softmax 

 1√dq  

> 3P2

X

> triangle edge = 1

Θtri. edge Γ( Q, K )tri. edge 



V (7) 

= softmax 

 1√dq

Γrot (Q, K )



V , where 

Γrot (Q, K )ij = Θ(i→j→k) Γ( Q, K )ij + Θ (j→k→i) Γ( Q, K )jk + Θ (k→i→j) Γ( Q, K )ki , (8) and proceed to the nearest vertex in the grid, constituting the third vertex of the triangle. The direction of the edges is determined by traversing the triangle. Notably, as flips modify left/right and/or up/down, the aforementioned sum is not invariant under flips; however, it preserves left/right rotations, which transform the grid into itself. 

Duality to convolutional kernels. See Figure (9) and (2) for a visualisation. The shared nature of the graph-matrix elements make them identical to a 2D-convolutional layer if the kernel size = 2 ∗ image size + 1 , for a square image. If a specific kernel size is chosen it corresponds to the graph matrix with zero entries for vertices of larger distance than the kernel size, see Figure (9). 

A.1. One-dimensional Data / Sequential Data 

While our discussion centers on the 2D grid, GSA may be adapted to 1D data where it ensures shift-symmetry and an optional flip-symmetry. One may define G formally for the 1D case as. The data points in the 1D data are consider vertices, then assume that the distances are measured w.r.t. a specific vertex, and edges can be viewed as vectors. Then, pick G ∈ RP ×P such that a shared weight is present in G:1. When horizontal component of edges have the same magnitude ( flip-preserving) 2. When the magnitude of the edges is same, but direction left/right i.e. the sign is accounted for which results in shift-symmetry. Points (1) and (2) above are completely analog to the more complicated 2D case which is proofed in section E. Flip-preserving 1D GSA (1) for sequential data implements time-reversal symmetry, recently discussed in the context of RL (Cheng et al., 2023). 

Application of Transformers in RL on Sequence data: 

The rise of Transformers in model-based RL (Chen et al., 2021; Micheli et al., 2023) opens up another direction which may adapt our approach. 

## B. Overview: Symmetry-invariant Transformer 

See Figure (3) for a schematic overview of the SiT architec-ture and for details on the symmetry of SiTs Figure 10. The local attention window’s are processed by a GSA, which then passes only the token embedding dimension onto the global GSA layers. Since the token embedding dimension is invariant under the respective symmetries the global GSA receives a symmetry-invariant input of the local patches. 

## C. Algorithm details 

The implementation of the rotation symmetry breaking is a bit lengthy however straightforward. We omit details of how to compute the angles of triangles of vertices on the square grid, and just assert the function "rot_grid_to_idx" here. Lastly, in order to achieve scalability of SiTs we need to establish a connecting between graph matrices and depth-wise convolutions with graph-weights as kernels. The latter implementation is significantly more memory efficient. We note here that the below code is equivalent to multiplication of graph matrix given in Lisitng 1. 

## D. GSA - Graph Symmetric Attention 

In the following K, V , and Q denote the keys, values, and queries respectively. They are derived from the in-put X: K = XW k, V = XW v , Q = XW q , where 

W q , W k, and W v are the corresponding weight matrices, i.e. Via = Pdf 

> =1

Xix W vxa The permutation invariant self-attention layer (Lee et al., 2019) is given by 

Att (K, V, Q ) = f (Q, K ) X W v (9) with f (Q, K ) = 1√dq

softmax  Q [X W k]T  ,

15 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size Divide the P local neighborhoods in N local Patches (usually N = #pixels) 

GSA Block - (P+1) attention window  

> Invariant Token Emb. Equivariant P-patches
> Token Embedding Global

OUTPUT 

> Choice and / or
> Globally invariant and/or equivariant Locally invariant and/or equivariant
> Global Transformer
> Input
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Local Transformer
> Choice and / or
> Rotated input
> Step 1: P local neighborhoods are rotated individually
> Step 2: P local neighborhoods positions are permuted
> Invariant / equivariant under Step 2
> Invariant / equivariant under Step 1
> Invariant / equivariant under Step 2

Figure 10. Illustration on exact global symmetries of SiTs; obtained as a result of the combined effect of local and global GSA modules. 

which can be rewritten using explicit indices. One finds 

Att (K, V, Q )q a =

PX

i=1 

softmax 

 1√dq

f (Q, K )q i 



Vi a 

with f (Q, K )q i =

#heads X

a=1 

Qq a [K]Ta i , (10) For the original self-attention mechanism (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) one simply needs to use a non-fixed Q = X W q in equation 10 as 

Att (K, V, Q )q a =

PX

i=1 1√dq

softmax 



f (Q, K )q i 



Vi a 

with f (Q, K )q i =

#heads X

a=1 

Qq a [ K ]Ta i ,

We propose the following three variants of Graph 

Symmetric Attention (GSAention) layer - all of which sepa-rately preserves the identical symmetries -GSA (K, V, Q ) = softmax 

 1√dq

Γ( Q, K )



Gv V

with Γ( Q, K ) = symmetric 



Gq Q [Gk K ]T 

,(11) and GSA (K, V, Q ) = softmax 

 1√dq

Γ( Q, K )



V (12) with Γ( Q, K ) = symmetric σ



Gqk 

 Q [K]T  + Gb



,

and moreover GSA (K, V, Q ) = softmax 

 1√dq

Γ( Q, K )



V W v

with Γ( Q, K ) = symmetric 



Q [ K ]T 

⊙ G , 

16 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

class GraphSymmetricAttention(Module): def __init__(self, dim, num_patches, num_heads): self.num_heads = num_heads self.qkv = Linear(dim, dim * 3) # Fully-connected layer # Generate shareable graph weights 

self.G_weights, self.G_idxs = graph_function(num_patches, dim * 3) def qkv_SymBreak(self,x): 

# Select indices of weights along dimension 

G = index_select(self.G_weights , 1, self.G_idxs) 

# Matrix mulitply with G; omit token embedding dimension 

y = G@x[:,1:,:] return cat([x[:,0:1,:], y],dim=1) def forward(self, x): B, N, C = x.shape qkv = self.qkv_SymBreak(self.qkv(x)) qkv = qkv.reshape(B, N, 3, self.num_heads, C // self.num_heads).permute(2, 0, 3, 1, 4) q, k, v = qkv[0], qkv[1], qkv[2] attn = (q @ k.transpose(-2, -1)) 

# symmetric attenion (if used) 

attn = attn + attn.transpose(-2, -1) attn = attn.softmax(dim=-1) return (attn @ v ).transpose(1, 2).reshape(B, N, C) 

Listing 1. Pseudocode for GSA (PyTorch-like). Changes relative to self-attention in brown. 

def graph_function(num_patches, in_features): 

#compute simple ditance of vertices in square grid 

for k in range(0,num_patches): for l in range(0,num_patches): for i in range(0,num_patches): for j in range(0,num_patches): I = k*num_patches+l J = i*num_patches+j dist[I,J] = sqrt((k-i)**2 + (l-j)**2) 

#identify equal ditances and associate unique index 

unique = dist.flatten().unique() dim = unique.shape[0] for i in range(dim): mask = (dist == unique[i]) idxs[mask] = i

#initialise independent weights 

weights = Parameter(Tensor(in_features,dim)) return weights , idxs 

Listing 2. Pseudocode for shared weight graph indices (PyTorch-like). 

In index notation equation 11 resutls in equation 13. More-over, equation 12 in detailed index notation is given by 

¯Γ( Q, K )q i = σ

 #heads X

> a=1
> P

X

> j=1

Gqkqj Qja [ K ]Ta i + Gbqi 



.

## E. Proofs of Invariance 

Permutation matrices P are orthogonal matrices. An orthog-onal matrix is a square matrix whose transpose is equal to its inverse, i.e. PT = P−1. A permutation matrix is a square matrix obtained by permuting the rows and columns of an identity matrix. It represents a permutation of the elements in a vector or a rearrangement of the columns and rows of another matrix. Since permuting the rows and columns of an identity matrix results in swapping rows and columns, 17 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

class GraphSymmetricAttention(Module): def __init__(self, dim, num_patches, num_heads): self.rot_SymBreak = Rotation_Symmetry( num_patches, num_heads) 

# ... we only highlight the differnces in the forward pass 

def forward(self, x): B, N, C = x.shape qkv = self.qkv_SymBreak(self.qkv(x)) qkv = qkv.reshape(B, N, 3, self.num_heads, C // self.num_heads).permute(2, 0, 3, 1, 4) q, k, v = qkv[0], qkv[1], qkv[2] attn = (q @ k.transpose(-2, -1)) 

# symmetric attenion (if used) 

attn = attn + attn.transpose(-2, -1) attn = self.rot_SymBreak(attn) attn = attn.softmax(dim=-1) return (attn @ v ).transpose(1, 2).reshape(B, N, C) class Rotation_Symmetry(Module): def __init__(self, num_patches, num_heads): 

#compute unique angles of triangles in square grid 

idxs, idxs_angles, dim = rot_grid_to_idx(num_patches) self.idxs = idxs self.idxs_angles = idxs_angles 

#initialise independent weights 

self.angles = Parameter(Tensor(num_heads,dim)) def forward(self, x): bs, heads, ps, ps= x.size() 

#index only non-token dimensions 

y = x[:,:,1:,1:].flatten(-2)[:,:,self.idxs] 

#preserve rotation/translation invariances, break flip invariances 

angles = index_select(self.angles,1,self.idxs_angles.flatten()) 

#multply vertex with corresponding weight and sum over triangle 

y = (y*angles).reshape((bs, heads, ps-1, ps-1,3)).sum(-1) 

#attach token dimension 

y = cat([ x[:,:,:,0:1],cat([x[:,:,0:1,1:], y],dim=2)],dim=-1) return y.reshape(x.shape) 

Listing 3. Pseudocode for GSA with rotation symmetry(PyTorch-like). Changes relative to self-attention in brown. 

the transpose of a permutation matrix is equal to its inverse. Therefore, permutation matrices are orthogonal matrices. The main theoretical claims of this work are summarized in proposition 3.1 , repeated here 

Proposition E.1 (Symmetry Guarantee) The GSA mech-anism (equation 3) represents a symmetry-preserving mod-ule. It may be both invariant and/or equivariant w.r.t. sym-metries of the input. The corresponding symmetry is dictated by the various graph selections. To achieve rotation invari-ance, the subsequent application of equation 4 is necessary. For invariance the token embedding i.e. the artificial (P-1) th patch is utilized at the output. Due to this mechanism, self-attention (equation 1) is permutation invariant. Equiv-ariance is achieved for the P-dimensional patch information of the output, i.e. not related to the token embedding. 

First of all let us emphasise that we have implicitly empiri-cally tested the validity of this claim in the various RL and supervised experiments in this work Let us discuss above claims in several steps: 

The attention mechanism equation 1 is permutation invariant (PI). Let P be a permutation of the input, i.e. Q, K, V → PQ, PK, PV as in equation 16. with 

[P K]T = KT PT = KT P−1 na d by using that the per-mutation matrix can be pulled out of the softmax-function as it is not affected by it results in equation 17. where we have used that PPi=1 P−1 

> mi

Pij = δmj , where δ is the Kronecker delta function, i.e. a formal way of writing the identity ma-trix. We have showed that the attention mechanism is permutation equivariant. Invariance follows form the observation that when a token embedding is added it is not affected by the permutation matrix which only acts 

18 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size                                                                              

> def graph_function(kernel_size): dist_Mat =torch.zeros((kernel_size,kernel_size))
> #only works correcttly if kernel_size is odd
> i0,j0 = (kernel_size -1) //2, (kernel_size -1) //2 for i in range(0,kernel_size): for jin range(0,kernel_size): distance =math.sqrt((i0-i)**2 +(j0-j)**2) dist_Mat[i,j] =distance unique =torch.unique(dist_Mat) idxs =torch.zeros(dist.shape) dim= unique.shape[0] for i in range(dim): mask =(dist == unique[i]) idxs[mask] =i
> #initialise independent weights
> weights =Parameter(Tensor(in_features,dim)) return weights ,idxs class GraphSymmetricAttentionEfficient(Module): ... def qkv_SymBreak(self,x):
> #Select indices of weights #of shape (in\_features,1, kernel\_size, kernel\_size)
> G=index_select(self.G_weights ,1, self.G_idxs)
> #depthwise convlution with weights G; omit token embedding dimension
> y=conv2d(x, G, padding= (kernel_size-1)//2, groups=in_features) return y...
> Listing 4. Pseudocode for an efficient GSA (PyTorch-like). Changes relative to Listing (1) and (2) are presented.

on the patches. Thus it remains invariant as 

Att (PK, PV, PQ)q=P +1 a = Att (K, V, Q )q=P +1 a

(18) 

The graph symmetric attention mechanism equation 3 represents a symmetry-preserving , i.e. it can be both invariant and equivariant w.r.t. symmetries of the input. The corresponding symmetry is dictated by the various graph selections. Let P be a permutation of the input ,i.e. Q, K, V → P Q, PK, PV then one finds equation 19. First of all note that since P G − G P̸ = 0 , i.e. they do not commute, thus GSA is not permutation equivariant (invariant). 

Definition 1 (Graph Matrix) The symmetric graph matrix 

G ∈ RP × RP are defined as having a shared weight at entry Gij = Gji if 

• the distance of the i-vertex to the j-vertex in the square grid of the 2D-image have same length. This leads to a flip and rotation invariant graph matrix. 

• the horizontal distance of the i-vertex to the j-vertex are the same, and the vertical distance is zero. This leads to a horizontal mirror flip graph. 

Thus a permutation Ps does commute with the graph matrix if and only if it maps shared weights of G to each other; then Ps G − G Ps = 0 . Then one can rewrite the above expression as in equation 21 The remaining steps are analog to the one for the conventional attention which is concluded in equation 22. which states the equivariance of GSA and invariance when a token embedding is used at di-mension P + 1 with respect to the symmetry preserving permutation Ps.

Two remaining points are twofold. First, the derivation above holds in particular for the symmetrisation (anti-symmetrisation) of Γ . Second, to see that graphs matrices with particular choices of shared weights lead to the desired symmetries of the 2D-grid we refer the reader to a visual proof given in figure 2. The proof of equivariance for the setting with Gkq , G bis analog. The case for G one notes that a P × P -matrix PPi=1 Pski Mij ∗ Gij = Mij ∗ Gij if and only if Ps only permutes shareable weights of the graph 19 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

GSA (K, V, Q )q a =

> P

X

> i=1 1

√dq

softmax 



Γ( Q, K )q i 

 PX

> j=1

Gv ij Vj a (13) with ¯Γ( Q, K )q i =

> #heads

X

> a=1
> P

X

> k=1

Gq qk Qk a PX

> j=1

Gkij [K]Ta j , (14) 

Γ( Q, K )i j = ¯Γ( Q, K )i j + ¯Γ( Q, K )j i . (15) 

Att (PK, PV, PQ)q a =

> P

X

> i=1

softmax 

 1√dq

Σ( PQ, PK)q i 

 PX

> j=1

Pij Vj a (16) with Σ( PQ, PK)q i =

> #heads

X

> a=1
> P

X

> l=1

Pql Ql a 

h PX

> j=1

Pij K

iTa j 

,Att (PK, PV, PQ)q a =

> P

X

> i=1
> P

X

> l=1

Pql 

 1√dq

softmax Σ( Q, K )l m 

 PX

> m=1

P−1

> mi P

X

> j=1

Pij Vj a 

=

> P

X

> j=1
> P

X

> l=1

Pql softmax 

 1√dq

Σ( Q, K )l j 



Vj a 

=

> P

X

> l=1

Pql Att (K, V, Q )l a (17) 

GSA (PK, PV, PQ)q a =

> P

X

> i=1

softmax 

 1√dq

Γ( PQ, PK)q i 

 PX

> j=1

Gv il PX

> l=1

Plj Vj a (19) with Γ( PQ, PK)q i =

> #heads

X

> a=1
> P

X

> k=1

Gq qk PX

> l=1

Pkm Qm a PX

> j=1

Gkij PX

> l=1

Pjl [K]Ta l , (20) 

GSA (PsK, PsV, PsQ)q a =

> P

X

> i=1

softmax 

 1√dq

Γ( PsQ, PsK)q i 

 PX

> l=1

Psil PX

> j=1

Gv lj Vj a 

with Γ( PsQ, PsK)q i =

> #heads

X

> a=1
> P

X

> l=1

Psqk PX

> k=1

Gq km Qm a PX

> l=1

Psij PX

> j=1

Gkjl [K]Ta l , (21) 

GSA (PsK, PsV, PsQ)i a =

> P

X

> l=1

Psij GSA (K, V, Q )j a (22) 

GSA (PsK, PsV, PsQ)i=P +1 a = GSA (K, V, Q )i=P +1 a (23) 20 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

matrix, i.e. thus Ps needs to obey the symmetry properties. The rest of the steps to conclude the proof are analog as above. 

To achieve rotation invariance, the subsequent applica-tion of equation 4 is necessary. Let Γij be graph P × P -matrix obeying rotation and flip symmetries of an under-lying square grid, and let T (i, j ) 7 → k be unique mapping for every tuple (i, j ) to the vertex k; i.e. such that (i, j, k )

forms a triangle in the grid. Moreover T is such that the angles of the resulting triangle only depend on the distance between i-j., and the orientation in clock-wise starting from 

i → j → k → i. The weights Θ( ij, jk ) are shared if the angles in the triangle are equal. 

Γrot (Q, K )ij = Θ(i→j→k) Γ( Q, K )ij (24) 

+ Θ (j→k→i) Γ( Q, K )jk + Θ (k→i→j) Γ( Q, K )ki ,

The notation is such that Θ(i→j→k) means correspond-ing to the angle between the edges i-j and j-k. Then we may rewrite the expression from the main text more concisely as where T (i, j ) = k. Any transformation which maps equal distance edges to each other will leave 

Γ( Q, K )ij , Γ( Q, K )jk , Γ( Q, K )ki invariant, respectively. However more specifically flip transformation change the meaning of clock-wise and anti-clockwise and thus • Θ(i→j→k) 7 → Θ(k→i→j),• Θ(j→k→i) 7 → Θ(j→k→i) ,• Θ(k→i→j) 7 → Θ(i→j→k).Thus equation 25 does not preserve flip transformation. While rotations leave the Θ′s invariant. This concludes the proof of the proposition. 

## F. Hyper-parameters - Main Experiments 

F.1. Minigrid - Lavacrossing 

We employ our invariant SiTs on top of IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) implementation based on torchbeast (Küttler et al., 2019). For the experiments involving SiTs and ViTs, we do not employ any hyper-parameter tuning compared to the CNN baseline (Jiang et al., 2021) - hyperparameters can be found in that reference. We use the stated number of local and global GSA with an embedding dimension of 64 and 8 heads. The attention window of the global GSA is the entire image, i.e 14 × 14 (pixels) which corrsponds to 

P = 196 patches ; while locally we choose patch-size of 5 (pixels), i.e. a attention window of 5x5 (pixels) or P = 25 

patches. We use rotation invariant GSA both on the local as well as on the global level. While, MiniGrid environments are partially observable by default we configure our instances to be fully observable; as well as change the default observation size 9×9 pixel to 14 ×

14 pixel. The latter is done by rendering the environment observation and then down-scaling to the respective size. Moreover, the default action space only allows the agent to turn left, turn right, or move forward, which requires the agent to keep track of its direction while navigating. To make the environment more accessible , we modify the action space, enabling the agent to move in all four candidate directions i.e. to move left, right, forward and backward. For Minigrid, we selected a 14x14 global image size as this is the minimum resolution at which the direction of the triangular shaped agent can be discerned when downscaling the RGB rendering of the environment. Smaller resolutions fail to capture this detail, while larger ones are feasible but not necessary. The local neighborhood size in Minigrid (in pixels) is required to be odd, so 3x3 and 5x5 are the smallest viable options. 

Architecture Details . For the CNN baseline, we use two convolutions layers two fully connected ones. The ViT and SiT and architectures both employ a skip connection 

x → x + Att(x) and x → x + GSA(x) , respectively. As in (Beyer et al., 2022), we modify the Vi architecture of (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) by not using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) after each attention layer. Our goal is to encounter the most simple functional setting incorporating the attention mechanism. We use one embedding fully-connected layer and use a patch-embedding. We employ our invariant SiTs on top of IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) implementation based on torchbeast(Küttler et al., 2019). For the experiments involving SiTs and ViTs, we do not employ any hyper-parameter tuning compared to the CNN baseline (Jiang et al., 2021). Qualitatively, even when trying to tune ViTs by running a hyper-parameter sweep, we could not improve their performance by more than a factor of two. 

F.2. Procgen experiments 

We train with PPO (DrAC) + Crop augmentation for SiT (Sit ∗, Set, Siet) and compare to the CNN (ResNet with model size 79 .4k comparable to the SiT - 65 .7k; ViT with 4-layers - 216 k ). For parameter details see table (2). We do not alter the ResNet architecture of (Raileanu et al., 2020) but chose the same hidden-size of 64 as for the SiT as well reduce the number of channels to [4,8,16]. We train over 25M steps. Following Agarwal et al. (2021b), we report the min-max normalized score that shows how far we are from maximum achievable performance on each environment. All scores are computed by averaging over both the 4 seeds and over the 23M-25M test-steps. We also report UCB-DrAC results with Impala-CNN( ×4) ResNet with 620k parameters, taken from (Raileanu et al., 2020). 21 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

F.3. DM control 

We train SieT - Without any hyper-parameter and backbone changes compared to our Procgen setup - wit SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) for 500k steps. No data-augmentation is used. SieT has comparable performance to the ViT baseline with 

> 1M weights (Hansen & Wang, 2021). For parameter details see table (2). 

F.4. Proof of sample-efficiency: Atari 100k 

The Atari 100k benchmark (Kaiser et al., 2020), compris-ing 26 Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013), spans various mechanics and evaluates a broad spectrum of agent capa-bilities. In this benchmark, agents are restricted to 100k actions per environment, approximating 2 hours of human gameplay. For context, typical unconstrained Atari agents undergo training for 50 million steps, signifying a 500-fold increase in experience. Current standards in Atari 100k for search-based methods in-clude MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) and EfficientZero (Ye et al., 2021), and recently a transformer based world-model approach (Micheli et al., 2023). Image-based SiTs may compliment those methods. In particular the latter may benefit from GSA, see our discussion in section A.1. We just provide a proof-of concept for using shift symmetric GSA instead of positional embedding in the world-model transformer of IRIS (Micheli et al., 2023). See Figure 11 for the results on KungFuMaster averaged over a hyper-parameter search for varying world-model training steps for 7 run for values in [50 , 200] (with default of 200). This illustrated the hyper-parameter insensitivity of GSA and suggests improved sample-efficiency over posi-tional embedding. 

Sample-efficiency: See Figure 12 and Figure 13 for results on KungFuMaster and MsPacMan, respectively. Here we have replaced the CNN in the actor by a smaller SieT model with 1 local and 2 global layers. To speed up training we have reduced the number of local features to 32 ( 64 global features). One infers that although the final training per-formance is lower than the one obtained by the baseline (IRIS + CNN) that IRIS + SieT is sample efficient, i.e. it reaches it peak quite early in training within 200 epochs which corresponds to about 40k exploration steps. Note that we have only tested one SieT model and performed no hyper-parameter search. The goal here is not to improve on Iris which had optimized h-parameters for their CNN actor model but to show that SieT admits the capability to learn from a small sample size; which is inferred from Figure 12 and Figure 13. Our goal here is not to show a comparison to state-of-the-art on Atari 100k in terms of sample-efficiency but that SiTs may be trained with ease on-top of standard algorithms. Human      

> 100k steps
> Figure 11. Results on KungFuMaster with 1D GSA in (Micheli et al., 2023) averaged over a hyper-parameter search for varying world-model training steps in [50 ,200] (with default of 200). 500 Epochs correspond to 100k exploration steps. IRIS
> 100k
> steps
> Figure 12. Results on KungFuMaster with SieT in actor instead of CNN in (Micheli et al., 2023), averaged over 3 seeds. The IRIS performance after 100k steps is marked by a blue horizontal bar.

Thus, for our Atari 100k experiments we use the unchanged hyper-parameter setting of Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2017) ,both for the baseline model - data-efficient CNN - as well as the algorithm for both CNN and our SieT. The Siet model is the same as in the Procgen experiments but with one less local GSA layer and increased embedding dimension, see Table 2. The baseline CNN has approximately 3x more weights than SieT. See Figure 14 for example training curves. F.5. Technical improvements 

Moreover, another minor modification to the architecture lead to a compute speed-up, which is not to use a token embedding in the local attention layer but rather use a depth wise graph-like convolution with kernel-size and stride equal to the patch-size as a last layer. This is common practice for ViTs i.e. by using normal convolutions that way. It is easy to see that our choice also preserves the symmetries of the graph-matrix. So, concludingly using a token embed-ding is not the only architectural choice which leads to a preservation of symmetries in SiTs. First, we establish a connection between graph matrices 22 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Suite / Algorithm Model Layers Channels hidden dim. 

> Procgen

(Raileanuet al., 2020) 

CNN 3 ResNet ((Raileanu et al., 2020)) [4,8,16] 64 

ViT 4 Attn. Layers ((Hansen & Wang, 2021)) 64 64 

E2CNN 4 E2CNN Layers ((Wang et al., 2022a)) [2,4,8,8] 64 

E2CNN ′

4 E2CNN Layers ((Wang et al., 2022a)) [2,4,8,16] 64 SiT 2 local GSA, 2 global GSA 64 SiT ∗ 2 local GSA, 2 global GSA 64 64 SeT 2 local GSA, 2 global GSA 64 64 SieT 2 local GSA, 2 global GSA 64 64 UCB-CNN 3 ResNet ((Raileanu et al., 2020)) [16,32,32] 256 

> DM −control

(Hansen &W ang, 2021) SieT 2 local GSA, 2 global GSA 64 64 

> Atari 100k

(Hesselet al., 2017) CNN data-efficient (Hessel et al., 2017) [32,64] ( ≈ 880 k) 256 SieT 1 local GSA, 2 global GSA 128 ( ≈ 309 k) 256 

Table 2. Architecture and hyper-parameter choices for Procgen and DM-control. UCB-CNN is taken from (Raileanu et al., 2020). All Sit variants contain one initial conv. layer with shared graph weights and a subsequent max. pooling layer to reduce the dimensionality of the problem. For the Atari experiments we use the unchanged hyper-parameter setting of Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2017). IRIS 100k 

> steps

Figure 13. Results on MsPacMan with SieT in actor instead of CNN in (Micheli et al., 2023), averaged over 3 seeds. The IRIS performance after 100k steps is marked by a blue horizontal bar. 

and depth-wise convolutions with graph-weights as kernels. The latter implementation is significantly more memory efficient and faster. Secondly, in order to accommodate for an extend local attention window we do use a graph matrix which connects pixels over lager distances while keeping the actual attention-mechanism focused on a smaller patch. Thirdly, rather trivially one may scale down the original image size from 64 × 64 pixels to 32 × 32 . This can be done by simple scaling the image, or by using one initial depth-wise convolutional layer with graph-like weights to preserve symmetry plus a subsequent Max-Pooling operation, or by simply using every second pixel of the input-image. Given the dominance of ViTs in Vision and Transformers in NLP, it’s plausible that improvements in Transformer tech-nology will similarly revolutionize vision-based RL, with ViTs becoming predominant. Recent technical advance-ments, such as efficient Transformers (Dao et al., 2022), Rainbow - data-efficient 

Atari Game CNN SieT 

SpaceInvaders 344 366.3 BreakOut 4.3 4.97 Pong -19.07 -20.04 

Table 3. CNN vs. SiTs on Atari 100k benchmark environments: SpaceInvaders, BreakOut, Pong . We train with Rainbow (Hes-sel et al., 2017) and compare to the data-efficient CNN ( ≈ 880 k

weights ) about 3× larger than our SieT - ≈ 309 k. The num-ber model parameters vary for different environments, however the factor in between CNN baseline and SieT is consistently 

≈ 3×. We present absolute scores, averaged over evaluation after 80k,90k,100k train-steps and 3 seeds, respectively. 

which offer up to a 10x performance boost may lead the way to a brad adaption of SiTs in RL. As the latter ensures that our sample efficient symmetry-invariant vision transformer becomes rather light-weight. 

CIFAR10 - supervised ablation study: For the baseline we use a ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) , embedding dimension of 512 , 4 layers, 16 heads, and one local attention layer with the same settings. The SiT has a the graph matrix G

added. 

## G. Additional Experiments and Ablations 

G.1. Ablation: Local and Global Symmetries in Attention for Image Understanding 

In this section we present an ablation study which ad-dresses the impact of local attention fields in SiTs, see 23 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size CNN SieT 

Figure 14. Example evaluation curves of Rainbow during training of SpaceInvaders seed 124 on top of rainbow - data efficient -. 

results in Figure 15. For the performance comparison of the attention mechanism with both symmetrisation and anti-symmetrisation (Equation 6) in SiTs, we restrict ourselves to provide qualitative results. Performing several experi-ments with two global layers, of either symmetrisation and anti-symmetrisation or both present, we conclude that in-deed the later admits the best relative performance as well as generalisation to the hard task, of all SiT setup with only global layers. However, due to the second softmax in the attention it is more memory consuming and thus applying it in combination with a the local layers is not feasible. Mem-ory efficient attention mechanism (Dao et al., 2022) have been developed recently thus our better architecture may become technically available in the future. Finally, we compare the impact of the employment of graph matrices in the values of the attention mechanism. We set Gv, = 1 and use one local and two global symmetric attention modules (Equation 6) with rotation invariance, see Figure 16. The graph matrix Gv, leads to a decrease in generalisation performance on goal change tasks and an increase in performance on the difficult environment involving many lava-crossings. Conceptually, the graph-matrix Gv, admits some similarities to convolutions, which are known to preform better on limited sample size (Hassani et al., 2022). Thus it may be easier for this architecture to identify two-dimensional information while setting it to the identity restores some degree of permutation invariance. 

G.2. Minigrid - Lavacrossing 

In this section we briefly provide the details with error bars to the experiment provided in the main text. The tables 4, 5 contain the mean rewards averaged over 200 test episodes after 20M time-steps. 

## H. Additional Evaluations & Ablations 

H.1. Patch-size Ablation on CIFAR 10 

In this section, we perform an ablation study on the sen-sitivity of Sit (Siet) to the patch-size hyper-parameter. In Train: Avg. Performance 

> Hard-N3
> Rotation {90°,-90°,180°}
> Goal {top, bottom}-right
> Random goal
> Test: Avg. Performance
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Success Rate (%)
> SiT (symmetric, 1 loc./1 glob.)
> SiT (1 loc / 1 glob)
> SiT (1 loc / 2 glob)
> SiT (2 global)

Figure 15. Ablations study SiT for different number of local and global layers as well as using the symmetric part of SiT ∗, defined in the appendix. Train: Avg. Performance Hard-N3   

> Rotation {90°,-90°,180°}
> Goal {top, bottom}-right
> Random goal
> Test: Avg. Performance
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Success Rate (%)
> SiT (1 loc./2 glob.) SiT-Gv,= 1 (1 loc./2 glob.)

Figure 16. Ablations for using the symmetric part of SiT ∗, defined in the appendix. We ablate by Gv, by setting Gv, = 1 with one local and two global symmetric attention modules equation 6 and rotation invariance. 

contrast to the evaluation of Figure (7b) here we employ a much smaller and faster model with 4 local and 4 global GSA layers and have reduced the feature dimensions to 64 and 256, respectively. We perform an ablation study of varying patch-size of SieT model on CIFAR10 with resolution of 32x32 and 128x128 pixels, see Tables (6) and (7), respectively. Additionally, we vary the dimension of the graph matrix in the local GSA for fixed patch-size in selected cases. We conclude that SieTs can be applied without loss of accuracy performance to higher-resolution tasks and moreover are relatively insen-sitive to changes in the patch-size (Beyer et al., 2023). 24 Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Size 

Table 4. Details main results for experiment on the Lavacrossing Minigrid environment. 

Domain Train Test Task CNN ViT PI-ViT SiT SiT-1 

> Lavacrossing N1 & N2

medium &easy 

train: easy-N1 0.96 ± 0.01 0.23 ± 0.41 0.01 ± 0.0 0.94 ± 13.0 0.90 ± 0.23 

train: medium-N2 0.69 ± 0.43 0.25 ± 0.42 0.01 ± 0.0 0.84 ± 0.32 0.70 ± 0.42 hard-N3 0.54 ± 0.47 0.19 ± 0.38 0.01 ± 0.0 0.46 ± 0.48 0.41 ± 0.47 rotations average 0.00 ±0.00 0.15 ± 0.34 0.01 ± 0.0 0.91 ± 0.21 0.91 ± 0.22 

goal top-right 0.08 ±0.27 0.21 ± 0.40 0.01 ± 0.0 0.71 ± 0.44 0.90 ± 0.24 

goal bottom-left 0.08 ±0.25 0.20 ± 0.40 0.01 ± 0.0 0.71 ± 0.44 0.90 ± 0.24 

random goal 0.07 ±0.25 0.15 ± 0.35 0.01 ± 0.0 0.24 ±42.0 0.21 ± 0.40 

Table 5. Ablations study SiT for different number of local and global layers as well as using the symmetric part of SiT ∗, defined in the appendix. 

Train Test Task ViT SiT 

2 global 1 loc./2 glob. symmetric 1/1 1 loc./1 glob. 1 loc./2 glob. 2 global 

> Lavacr.

N1/N2 

train: easy-N1 0.08 ± 0.27 0.23 ± 0.41 0.86 ± 0.29 0.90 ± 0.23 0.93 ± 18.0 0.87 ± 0.28 

train: medium-N2 0.12 ± 0.31 0.25 ± 0.42 0.88 ± 0.26 0.70 ± 0.42 0.84 ±0.32 0.59 ± 0.46 hard-N3 0.10 ± 0.29 0.19 ± 0.38 0.45 ± 0.43 0.41 ± 0.47 0.46 ±0.48 0.03 ± 0.16 rotations avg. 0.03 ± 0.16 0.15 ± 0.34 0.88 ± 0.27 0.91 ± 0.22 0.95 ± 0.1 0.91 ± 0.21 goal top-right 0.03 ± 0.15 0.21 ± 0.40 0.81 ± 0.35 0.90 ± 0.24 0.71 ± 0.44 0.60 ± 0.48 goal bottom-left 0.02 ± 0.13 0.20 ± 0.40 0.81 ± 0.35 0.90 ± 0.24 0.71 ± 0.44 0.60 ± 0.48 random goal 0.08 ± 0.27 0.15 ± 0.35 0.26 ± 0.43 0.21 ± 0.40 0.28 ± 0.44 0.12 ± 0.32 

Table 6. CIFAR 10 - 32x32 Results. Ablation study of varying patch-size of SieT model on CIFAR10 with resolution of 32x32 pixels. Additionally, we vary the dimension of the graph matrix in the local GSA, see x-axis. Gray bars indicate non-available cases, i.e. the combination of graph-matrix size with patch-size has not been conducted.                                                       

> GSA Layers Patch-Size Global Patch-Size Local Graph Matrix Size Batch-Size Test Accuracy 25 Epochs Test Accuracy 200 Epochs
> 4loc-4glob 8x8 4x4 8x8 64 66% -4loc-4glob 4x4 8x8 16x16 64 62% -4loc-4glob 16x16 2x2 4x4 64 66% -4loc-4glob 4x4 8x8 8x8 64 58% 75% 4loc-4glob 16x16 2x2 8x8 64 67% 81% 4loc-4glob 8x8 4x4 6x6 64 65% -4loc-4glob 8x8 4x4 8x8 64 66% -4loc-4glob 8x8 4x4 12x12 64 66% -

Table 7. CIFAR 10 - 128x128 Results. Ablation study of varying patch-size of SieT model on CIFAR10 with resolution of 128x128 pixels. The images are scaled up using AI tools CIFAR-10 128x128. Additionally, we vary the dimension of the graph matrix in the local GSA, see x-axis. Gray bars indicate non-available cases, i.e. the combination of graph-matrix size with patch-size has not been conducted.                                     

> GSA Layers Patch-Size Global Patch-Size Local Graph Matrix Size Batch-Size Test Accuracy 25 Epochs Test Accuracy 15 Epochs
> 4loc-4glob 8x8 16x16 16x16 48 66% 63% 4loc-4glob 8x8 16x16 32x32 48 69% 64% 4loc-4glob 8x8 16x16 64x64 48 69% 64% 4loc-4glob 8x8 16x16 32x32 16 70% 66% 4loc-4glob 4x4 32x32 64x64 869% 66%

25