Title: Planner-Centric Reinforcement Learning for Deep Research with Structure-Aware Reward

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30824v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 00:34:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# DecomposeR: Planner-Centric Reinforcement Learning for Deep Research with Structure-Aware Reward 

Mustafa Anis Hussain, Xinle Wu, Yao Lu 

National University of Singapore 

{mustafah,wuxl,luyao}@comp.nus.edu.sg 

Abstract 

Deep research tasks require LLMs to plan what to investigate, retrieve evidence, and synthesize long-form answers across multiple branches of inquiry. Existing training paradigms either rely on short-form verifiable QA as a proxy or optimize monolithic long trajectories, which makes planning and execution difficult to dis-entangle and yields weak credit assignment for the planning process. We propose Decom-poseR, a planner-centric deep research frame-work that represents research plans as typed directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), allowing plan-ning to be made explicit, structured, and re-wardable. We train a Qwen3-8B model in two stages: planner reinforcement learning (RL) first learns graph structure and query decom-position to improve research planning, and an-swerer reinforcement learning (RL) then learns branch-level execution and final synthesis con-ditioned on the learned plan. By assigning re-wards to explicit planner tokens and structured components rather than to a flat trajectory, De-composeR enables finer-grained optimization of planning while reducing the ambiguity of end-to-end training. Experiments show that DecomposeR-8B improves over strong compa-rable open baselines by 5.1–8.0 points on pop-ular long-form benchmarks due to improved planning and answering capabilities. 

1 Introduction 

Deep research (DR) requires planning what to in-vestigate, issuing multiple searches, selecting ev-idence, and synthesizing findings into a citation-grounded long-form report. Such workflows are increasingly important for scientific literature syn-thesis, clinical evidence aggregation, and general investigative tasks (Asai et al., 2024a; Singh et al., 2025; Arora et al., 2025; Du et al., 2025). Frontier proprietary systems demonstrate the practical value of this workflow (OpenAI, 2025; Comanici et al., 2025; Perplexity Team, 2025), while open alter-natives either wrap capable LLMs in training-free retrieval pipelines (Li et al., 2026a,b) or post-train smaller models with reinforcement learning (Jin et al., 2025; Song et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2026; Mei et al., 2025). Despite this progress, current RL-trained DR sys-tems share two reward-side limitations that bound their training signal. First, credit assignment is ambiguous. Reasoning, search, evidence selection, branch synthesis, and final writing are interleaved in a flat ReAct-style trajectory (Yao et al., 2023), and a single scalar reward derived from the final answer is propagated across every model action. A weak final answer therefore cannot be attributed to a specific failure point so the gradient cannot direct improvement towards the responsible com-ponent. Second, reward is sparse. Intermediate planning, search, and synthesis decisions receive little to no direct supervision (Jin et al., 2025; Song et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2026); every intermediate action is shaped only through its eventual effect on the terminal answer, which both slows learning and destabilizes credit propagation across long DR trajectories. We introduce DecomposeR, which addresses both limitations through a single design principle: structure-aware reward modeling for deep research. The research plan is materialized as an explicit typed DAG (Figure 1) in which search nodes issue web queries, aggregate nodes synthesize branch-level conclusions, and a terminal answer node inte-grates branches into the final report. Because every plan component is individually addressable, reward can be assigned to the corresponding part of the research process rather than only to the final report. Planner rewards score rubric coverage over plan-node fields, search quality over search nodes, and structural behavior such as branch breadth and evi-dence reuse; answerer rewards score branch-level execution and final synthesis. This design improves credit assignment by tying reward to the compo-nent responsible for each decision, and reduces 

> arXiv:2605.30824v1 [cs.AI] 29 May 2026 Figure 1: DecomposeR rollout structure. The planner emits an initial typed DAG, receives search results, revises the graph and fetch set, and then the answerer executes the revised graph in topological waves before writing the final answer.

sparsity by replacing a single trajectory-end scalar with signals distributed across the decomposition. We evaluate DecomposeR on three long-form benchmarks: DeepResearchBench, ResearchQA-Mini, and HealthBench. DecomposeR improves over strong comparable open baselines by 5.1–8.0 points despite a substantially smaller end-to-end training budget. Our contributions are: (1) Structure-aware re-ward modeling for deep research : we materialize the DR plan as a typed DAG whose structural com-ponents are directly addressable by reward func-tions, allowing separate signals to optimize the cor-responding plan and execution components rather than being read off a trajectory terminus; (2) De-composeR framework : we instantiate these re-wards with typed decomposition graphs and staged reinforcement learning, making search breadth, ev-idence reuse, branch integration, execution fidelity, and final answer quality addressable optimization targets; and (3) Empirical validation : we evalu-ate on three long-form benchmarks, with analysis showing that the reward components, structured decomposition interface, and search-conditioned revision each contribute to the final gains. 

2 Related Work 

Deep research agents. Recent DR systems use web-scale retrieval and long-form synthesis to an-swer open-ended queries. Frontier systems such as OpenAI Deep Research rely on strong base models and inference-time orchestration (OpenAI, 2025). WebWeaver moves toward more explicit structure through dynamic outlines, evidence mem-ory, and citation-grounded writing, but remains an inference-time dual-agent framework rather than an RL objective over a typed plan (Li et al., 2026b). WebThinker interleaves thinking, searching, nav-igation, and drafting inside a web-enabled rea-soning loop and improves tool use with online preference optimization (Li et al., 2026a). Web-Sailor and WebExplorer focus on long-horizon web agents, constructing high-uncertainty or evolved web-navigation tasks and training agents to han-dle many tool calls (Li et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025). These systems demonstrate the importance of search and synthesis, while DecomposeR fo-cuses on making the research plan itself a struc-tured, separately rewarded policy object. 

RL for search and tool use. GRPO and RLVR-style post-training have been applied to reasoning, search, and tool use (Shao et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025). Search-R1 trains models to interleave rea-soning and search with retrieved-token masking and outcome rewards (Jin et al., 2025), while R1-Searcher studies outcome-based RL for invoking search without process supervision (Song et al., 2025). ReSearch similarly treats search calls as part of the reasoning chain using explicit <search> and 

<result> tags, and masks retrieved results from the policy-gradient loss (Chen et al., 2026). O 2-Searcher targets both open-ended and closed-ended QA through a local search environment and task-aware rewards (Mei et al., 2025). ParallelSearch addresses an orthogonal efficiency problem by re-warding models for decomposing independent sub-queries that can be searched in parallel (Zhao et al., 2025). DecomposeR differs by exposing the full research plan as a typed graph and assigning re-ward to graph components before answer synthesis is trained, rather than treating the search trajectory as a flat sequence of tool actions. 

Query decomposition and retrieval-augmented generation. Prior decomposition methods decom-pose complex questions into subproblems through prompting or modular inference (Khot et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Trivedi et al., 2023). Retrieval-augmented generation systems learn when and what to retrieve (Asai et al., 2024b; Jiang et al., 2023). DecomposeR brings these ideas into RL for open-ended DR by making decomposition a train-able graph policy rather than an unobserved latent reasoning trace. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

Existing RL-trained DR systems model the agent rollout as a flat sequence 

τflat = ( x, m 1, o 1, . . . , m T , o T , y ), (1) in which model actions mt and tool observations 

ot interleave until a final answer y is emitted, and a single scalar reward R(x, y ) is propagated through every mt for policy update. The limitations identi-fied in Sec. 1 are directly readable from this formu-lation. First, every mt – whether it carries a plan-ning decision, a search query, or a synthesis sen-tence – is updated under the same R, so the gradient cannot localize the failure to a specific role. Sec-ond, R(x, y ) supervises the entire {mt}Tt=1 , leav-ing each intermediate mt shaped only through its eventual effect on the terminal y. Third, mt is an unstructured token sequence, so dependencies be-tween subtasks and the reuse of evidence across branches have no native representation. DecomposeR replaces this flat trajectory with a factored one in which an explicit plan G medi-ates between a planner policy πP and an answerer policy πA:

τ = ( x, G0, Z, G1, F, O 1: K , y ), (2) where G0 is an initial plan emitted by πP , Z =

E(G0) are search observations returned by the envi-ronment E, G1 is the planner’s revised plan, F are fetched documents, O1: K are intermediate outputs produced by πA in K topological waves, and y is the final answer. The joint trajectory distribution factorises as 

π(τ |x) = πP (G0|x) E(Z|G 0)

· πP (G1, F |x, G0, Z ) πA(O1: K , y |x, G1, F )

(3) This structure directly resolves the limitations of Eq. 1: πP and πA become separately optimisable policies, each amenable to its own reward (resolv-ing role entanglement); rewards can be assigned to G1, to individual Ok, and to y respectively, dis-tributing supervision across the rollout (resolving sparsity); and G is an explicit structured object that the planner emits and the answerer consumes (re-solving expressiveness, with the structure detailed in Sec. 3.3). Consequently the training objective decomposes into two role-specific objectives, 

JP (θP ) = Ex[RP (G1; x, Z )] ,

JA(θA) = Ex[RA(O1: K , y ; x, G1)] (4) optimised in two sequential RL stages with RP and 

RA representing the planner and answerer reward respectively. 

3.2 Overview 

Figure 1 illustrates the DecomposeR rollout, which is identical at training and inference time up to the application of gradients. Given a query x, the planner first emits an initial plan G0 in the form of a typed DAG (the construction of which is detailed in Sec. 3.3). The environment E executes every search node in G0 and returns the observation set 

Z. The planner consumes Z and emits a revised plan G1 together with a small set of URLs F to be fetched; E then runs only the newly added or modified search nodes in G1 and fetches the URLs in F , reusing observations from unchanged search nodes. Finally, the answerer fills the aggregate nodes of G1 in topological waves and produces the final citation-grounded report at the answer node. The three design choices underlying this pipeline are justified below. 

Why a typed DAG. A typed DAG with search-, aggregate-, and answer-type nodes makes cross-source evidence reuse and hierarchical synthesis explicit at the structural level, both of which linear lists and tree-structured plans cannot natively ex-press. The structure further exposes well-defined properties– branch breadth, cross-branch integra-tion, query distinctness– as addressable units that the planner reward can target directly (Sec. 3.4.2). 

Why two-turn planning. G0 is generated from x

alone and therefore reflects only the planner’s para-metric guess at what is worth investigating. Para-metric knowledge frequently misaligns with what is actually retrievable on the open web: queries can return sparse, off-topic, or outdated snippets. The second turn closes the planning loop with retrieval reality, letting the planner drop ineffective sub-queries, add new subqueries inspired by retrieved snippets, and concentrate full-page fetching on the URLs most likely to support the synthesis. 

Why decouple planner and answerer. Collaps-ing planning and answering into one policy un-der a single trajectory-level reward conflates their failure modes: a low answer score cannot distin-guish a weak plan executed faithfully from a strong plan executed poorly. By training the two roles sequentially, Planner RL optimises rewards that depend only on G1 and never on answerer output, so plan quality is isolated from execution noise. Answerer RL then trains against a fixed planner, so answerer credit is not confounded by drifting plan quality. Staging also reduces the non-stationarity inherent to jointly training two policies that act as each other’s environment, leaving two stable single-policy optimisation problems. 

3.3 Plan Representation 

The plan G must satisfy three requirements: ex-pose addressable structure for fine-grained reward design, capture cross-source evidence reuse and hi-erarchical synthesis, and admit efficient execution. Linear subquery lists provide only a flat sequence with no notion of branch reuse, and tree-structured subgoal plans forbid a node from being shared across multiple descendants. We therefore repre-sent G as a typed directed acyclic graph, whose construction and execution we now detail. 

Node types. G contains three node types. A search node s ∈ N s carries a query string and a list of key points specifying what evidence the query should return. An aggregate node a ∈ N a carries a syn-thesis brief consisting of a need statement and key points to be covered in its output. The terminal answer node vans carries the final synthesis brief; it has no outgoing edges, and exactly one such node exists per plan. 

Edges and validity. A directed edge u → v de-clares that the output of u is consumed by v: edges from search nodes carry retrieved evidence, edges between aggregate nodes carry branch-level con-clusions, and edges into vans carry the inputs to the final report. A validator enforces that G is a con-nected DAG with valid JSON syntax, valid node IDs, allowed node types, no cycles, and exactly one 

vans . Invalid graphs are rejected at the validity gate before any reward is computed (Sec. 3.4.2). 

Topological-wave execution. Given a valid G1,the answerer executes it wave by wave. Wave Wℓ

contains all aggregate nodes whose parents have already been completed; all nodes in a wave are generated in a single model turn, exploiting the fact that same-wave aggregates are conditionally independent given their parents. After all aggregate nodes are filled, a final turn generates vans condi-tioned on its parent branches and the cumulative cited evidence. Topological execution preserves the dependency order implied by G while minimising the number of model turns required. 

3.4 Staged Training 

We train the planner and the answerer sequen-tially atop a shared Qwen3-8B backbone with role-conditioned prompts and role-specific LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2021): a planner adapter is active when the model emits a graph, and an an-swerer adapter is active when the model emits ag-gregate or answer outputs. Training proceeds in three phases: a cold-start SFT phase that initialises both adapters from teacher trajectories, a planner RL phase that refines the planner adapter, and an an-swerer RL phase that refines the answerer adapter starting from a checkpoint with the planner-RL adapter merged in. Both RL phases use Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024) with token-level masking that excludes en-vironment observations from the policy gradient; the full GRPO objective and masking definitions are deferred to Appendix A.2. We describe each phase below, focusing on the DecomposeR-specific reward design. 

3.4.1 Cold-Start SFT 

We first perform supervised fine-tuning to teach the model the basic graph-emission protocol and wave-execution format, so that subsequent RL op-erates on a policy that already produces parseable outputs rather than wasting samples on protocol violations. A frontier teacher model (GPT-5-mini) generates complete planner–answerer trajectories for a held-out subset of training queries; each tra-jectory comprises planner turns (initial and revised graphs) and answerer turns (aggregate waves and final answer). We retain only trajectories that pass the graph validator and the answerer parser end-to-end, discarding those with malformed JSON, invalid node references, or schema-violating out-put. Surviving trajectories yield two streams of turn-level examples– planner turns under the plan-ner system prompt, and answerer turns under the answerer system prompt– on which the planner and answerer adapters are jointly initialised. 

3.4.2 Planner RL 

The planner adapter is refined with a reward over three plan-quality dimensions: semantic coverage of the user’s information need, retrieval quality of the search queries, and structural expressiveness of the DAG, rewarding each independently before combining them: 

Rplan = 1[Valid( G)]  λcov Crub + λsearch Qsearch 

+ λgraph Egraph 

.

(5) The hard validity gate 1[Valid( G)] ensures that pro-tocol correctness is established before quality sig-nals take effect so invalid graphs receive zero re-ward regardless of their semantic content. All λ

terms in this subsection are scalar reward weights. 

Rubric coverage Crub . The rubric for each train-ing query is generated in advance by a frontier LLM conditioned on the query together with re-trieved web context, producing query-specific eval-uation criteria R = {(ru, w u)} of the form “the response should cover ru”. Rubric coverage mea-sures how well the plan has semantically antici-pated these criteria, by taking, for each rubric item, its best normalised cosine similarity with any non-answer node field ( query , key_points , need ): 

Crub =

P 

> u

wu max n∈N \{ vans } cos + ϕ(u), ϕ (n)P 

> u

wu

,

(6) where ϕ(·) denotes the sentence embedding func-tion and cos +(·, ·) ≡ max(0 , cos( ·, ·)) clamps neg-ative similarities to zero. Anchoring the rubric to plan-node fields rather than to the final answer gives the planner direct semantic feedback on the emitted plan. 

Search quality Qsearch . Search quality measures whether the search nodes target the right aspects and avoid redundancy: 

Qsearch = λsearch ,cov Csearch + λsearch ,dist Dsearch ,

(7) where Csearch is the rubric-to-search-query similar-ity ( Crub restricted to search nodes), and Dsearch =1−¯spair is the complement of the mean pairwise co-sine similarity among search queries. Thus Csearch 

rewards on-topic retrieval, while Dsearch rewards nonredundant queries. 

Graph expressiveness Egraph . Graph expres-siveness combines synthesis breadth Bsynth , cross-   

> 0100 200 300
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> RL step
> reward
> Planner Reward

Figure 2: Planner RL reward dynamics. The black curve shows the smoothed planner reward and the grey trace shows raw rollout means. Structural diagnostics are reported in Appendix A.6. 

branch integration Icross , and search breadth 

Bsearch :

Egraph =λgraph ,synth Bsynth + λgraph ,cross Icross 

+ λgraph ,search Bsearch .

(8) The subterms are 

Bsynth = f |pa Na (vans )| · dpar , (9) 

Icross = 12

 rfan + rint 

, (10) 

Bsearch = f |N s|, (11) where f (k) = 1 − 1/k is a diminishing-returns count score, dpar is the mean pairwise cosine di-versity among the answer node’s aggregate parents, 

rfan is the fraction of search nodes feeding at least two aggregate nodes, and rint is the fraction of aggregate nodes integrating at least two parent in-puts. Thus Bsynth rewards diverse direct inputs to the final answer, Icross rewards evidence reuse and multi-source branch integration, and Bsearch 

rewards search breadth. 

3.4.3 Answerer RL 

With the planner adapter fixed, the answerer adapter is refined to execute the plan faithfully and synthesise a high-quality final report. Graphs are generated by the planner-RL model and rolled out through the environment in advance, so the an-swerer trains on a stable distribution of plans rather than on a moving target. We decompose answerer quality into two dimensions: branch-level execu-tion fidelity (measuring whether each aggregate node covers its declared key points) and global syn-thesis quality (measuring whether the final answer integrates the branches and satisfies the rubric) and combine them as 

Rans = λexec Rexec + λsynth Rsynth (12) All λ terms in this subsection are scalar reward weights. Parse failures receive partial credit com-puted over the successfully completed waves; this eliminates the binary reward cliff that destabilised early experiments, in which a single malformed node would zero out a trajectory whose mean base-line was well above zero. 

Execution reward Rexec . Execution reward scores each aggregate node independently against its declared key points. Only aggregate nodes are scored, since search nodes are executed by E rather than by the policy. For each v ∈ N a, we com-bine an embedding-level and a lexical key-point coverage signal: 

rv = λexec ,emb Kemb (v) + λexec ,lex Klex (v) (13) 

Kemb (v) is a greedy bipartite matching score be-tween the node’s key_points embeddings and its output-sentence embeddings, weighted by recall; 

Klex (v) is the mean fraction of each key point’s content tokens present in the output. The embed-ding signal captures semantic coverage, while the lexical signal grounds it deterministically. Per-node scores are aggregated with a shifted harmonic mean: 

Rexec = |N a|

P

> v∈N a
> 11+ rv

− 1 ∈ [0 , 1] (14) The shifted harmonic mean maps all-zero to 0 and all-one to 1.

Synthesis reward Rsynth . Synthesis reward targets the final answer rather than individual branches: 

Rsynth = λsynth ,judge Jrub + λsynth ,util Ubranch .

(15) 

Jrub is a rubric-weighted judge score from an ex-ternal LLM on a five-point scale. Ubranch is the mean fraction of each branch’s content tokens that appear in the final answer; it provides a determinis-tic signal that the model is actually consuming its intermediate branch outputs. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks and metrics. We evaluate Decom-poseR on three long-form deep-research bench-marks spanning different domains. DeepRe-searchBench (DRBench) provides expert-written       

> 0100 200 300
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> RL step
> weighted reward
> Answerer Reward Components
> overall execution synthesis
> Figure 3: Answerer RL reward dynamics. The plot shows overall answerer reward together with its execu-tion and synthesis contributions. Length diagnostics are reported in Appendix A.6.

multi-domain research tasks that require web ex-ploration, citation-backed synthesis, and report-quality judgment. ResearchQA-Mini (ResQA-Mini) evaluates scholarly question answering with survey-derived research questions and rubric items. 

HealthBench evaluates responses to health-related conversations against physician-informed rubric criteria, testing evidence synthesis in a high-stakes domain. For all three benchmarks we report the official rubric- or judge-based score; each met-ric captures coverage, factual correctness, and re-sponse quality on a scale where higher is better. Appendix A.4 provides benchmark-specific evalua-tion details. 

Base model. We build DecomposeR on Qwen3-8B (Yang et al., 2025) with two LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2021): one for the planner role and one for the answerer role. All ablation variants use this same backbone with the same SFT initialization, so that comparisons across variants isolate the effect of the studied design choice. 

Baselines. We compare DecomposeR-8B against two broad types of systems: (i) Commercial deep-research systems : OpenAI (o4-mini) Deep Re-search, Gemini Deep Research and Perplexity Deep Research, accessed through their official APIs. (ii) Open deep-research and search agents :WebThinker (QwQ-32B and 32B-DPO), Tongyi DeepResearch-30B, WebExplorer-8B, Search-R1, ASearcher-Web-7B and Qwen3-8B equipped with search. We additionally report a DecomposeR-8B (SFT only) variant to isolate the effect of the two RL stages. 

Training data. We obtain a filtered pool of roughly 4,000 long-form English prompts/queries across OpenScholar, SearchArena, and ScholarQA sources. We use 2,325 queries for cold-start SFT, converted from teacher planner–answerer trajecto-ries into 10,532 turn-level supervision examples. For RL, both planner RL and answerer RL use the same 1,432-query prepared set, with planner graphs, search results, fetched pages, rubrics, and citation catalogs attached to each query artifact. 

Training protocol. Both RL stages use GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) with verl (Sheng et al., 2025) and vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) for training and rollout generation respectively. The environment uses Jina Search for search-node execution (up to five results per node) and Serper for URL fetching (up to four URLs per revision turn). Full GRPO details, hyperparameters, and prompt templates are in Appendix A. Reported numbers are averaged over multiple random seeds. A central design de-cision is that reward weights are specified once and kept fixed across the main experiment and every ablation variant reported in this section. The reward specification uses no benchmark-specific weight calibration. Consequently, performance dif-ferences across variants reflect the design choices being studied rather than reward retuning. Reward weights used are reported in full in Appendix A.5. 

4.2 Main Results Overall performance. Table 1 shows that DecomposeR-8B (SFT+RL) is the strongest open model across the three long-form benchmarks compared against models of similar size, achiev-ing 41.8 on DRBench, 42.0 on HealthBench, and 71.4 on ResearchQA-Mini. Compared with Qwen3-8B + Search, DecomposeR improves by 7.4 points on DRBench, 22.2 points on Health-Bench, and 14.4 points on ResearchQA-Mini, de-spite using the same backbone scale. It also sub-stantially outperforms WebExplorer-8B and other RL-trained search agents such as Search-R1-7B and ASearcher-Web-7B indicating that the im-provement is not simply due to giving an 8B model access to search, but training it to organize retrieval and synthesis through the DecomposeR framework. 

RL improves substantially over SFT. The SFT-only model already benefits from learning the typed graph and wave-execution protocol, but the two RL stages provide large additional gains. The improve-ment is largest on ResearchQA-Mini, where rubric-style coverage and synthesis are central, and re-mains positive on HealthBench, where domain sen-sitivity makes unsupported synthesis more costly. These gains suggest that SFT is sufficient to initial-ize the graph-emission and wave-execution proto-col, but that staged RL is needed for the planner and answerer to use this protocol effectively . 

Comparison with larger open systems. Among open deep-research systems, DecomposeR is the best on average and is competitive with or stronger than substantially larger models on individual benchmarks. It outperforms Tongyi DeepResearch-30B-A3B on DRBench and ResearchQA-Mini and exceeds WebThinker-32B-DPO on DRBench and HealthBench, while remaining close on ResearchQA-Mini. This is notable because those systems rely on much larger backbones and/or more carefully-engineered inference behavior. 

4.3 Staged Training is Necessary 

The two experiments in this section answer two distinct questions: whether staged training outper-forms joint training (B1), and whether the improve-ment actually traces back to better plans rather than to the answerer compensating for weak plans (B2). Both halves of Table 2 share the same fixed reward weights as the main experiment. 

B1: Staged vs. Joint RL. We construct a Joint RL baseline that shares with DecomposeR the same Qwen3-8B backbone, separate planner and answerer LoRA adapters, SFT initialization, and typed DAG plan representation. The variants differ only in training schedule and reward assignment. In Joint RL, the planner and answerer adapters are up-dated simultaneously from a single trajectory-level reward computed from the final answer. This setup isolates the effect of staged, role-specific optimiza-tion from changes in model architecture or plan representation. The top half of Table 2 shows that staged training outperforms joint training by 3.7– 4.7 points across benchmarks. The gap is largest on DRBench, whose general-domain queries produce the longest rollouts and therefore suffer most from sparse trajectory-end credit assignment. 

B2: Planner quality with a fixed external an-swerer. A natural concern is that the gains in B1 might come from the answerer learning to compen-sate for weak plans rather than from the planner producing better plans. We address this by holding the answerer fixed and varying only the planner. Specifically, we use GPT-4.1 with a standardized execution prompt as an external answerer and feed it plans from four planners: GPT-5 with a plan-ning prompt (strong training-free reference), the System Family DeepResearchBench HealthBench ResearchQA-Mini Average                                                                  

> Commercial deep-research systems
> OpenAI Deep Research DR agent 46.9 54.0 79.1 60.0 Gemini Deep Research DR agent 48.9 52.5 68.8 56.7 Perplexity Deep Research DR agent 42.7 –75.1 –GPT-5 + Search LLM+search 50.7 –78.2 –
> Open deep-research or search agents
> WebThinker QwQ-32B Open DR 37.9 36.5 72.3 48.9 WebThinker-32B-DPO Open DR 40.6 39.4 74.1 51.4 Tongyi DeepResearch-30B-A3B Open DR 40.6 45.9 66.7 51.1 WebExplorer-8B Open search 36.7 34.0 65.5 45.4 Search-R1-7B Open search 9.7 1.1 28.4 13.1 ASearcher-Web-7B Open Search 10.0 -13.0 22.5 6.5 Qwen3-8B + Search LLM+search 34.4 19.8 57.0 37.1
> DecomposeR-8B (SFT only) Ours 36.3 39.1 63.8 46.4
> DecomposeR-8B (SFT + RL) Ours 41.8 42.0 71.4 51.7

Table 1: Main results on three long-form deep-research benchmarks. DecomposeR-8B (SFT+RL) refers to the full model trained with both planner-RL and answerer-RL stages. Entries marked “–” indicate that no public result was available or that running the evaluation was prohibitively expensive.                    

> Variant DRBench HealthBench ResQA-Mini
> B1: Same architecture, different training schedule
> Joint RL 37.1 38.3 66.9
> Staged RL (Ours) 41.8 42.0 71.4
> B2: Different planners, fixed external answerer (GPT-4.1)
> GPT-5 (prompt only) 39.5 40.3 68.5 SFT-only planner 35.4 36.0 61.3 Joint-RL planner 37.5 37.3 65.5
> DecomposeR planner 39.8 39.7 69.4

Table 2: Validating staged training. B1 compares RL-pipeline variants trained on the same SFT model. B2 isolates planner quality by holding the answerer fixed and varying only the planner. 

SFT-only planner, the Joint-RL planner from B1, and the DecomposeR planner. The same exter-nal answerer executes all four plan distributions, so differences in final answer quality reflect only differences in plan quality. The bottom half of Ta-ble 2 shows that the DecomposeR planner produces plans whose downstream answer quality exceeds the SFT-only and Joint-RL planners considerably and closely trails or exceeds the GPT-5 planning baseline despite using a substantially smaller back-bone. Combined with B1, this confirms that the gains from staged training trace back to the planner, not to answerer compensation. Additional ablation studies reported in Ap-pendix A.7 and A.8 further isolate the design choices behind these gains. The reward-component ablation tests whether performance comes from a single dominant signal or varied sources. The plan-representation and planner-revision ablations then test whether typed DAG structure and search-conditioned revision are necessary by replacing the DAG with linear/tree structures and by disabling the post-search revision turn. 

4.4 Case Study 

Appendix C gives a representative DecomposeR rollout, including the pre- and post-revision graphs in Figures 15 and 17, the turn flow in Table 9, and the revised graph summary in Table 10. The ex-ample highlights framework-specific behavior to look for: the initial decomposition is revised after search feedback; added or modified search nodes and fetch requests change the evidence available to the answerer; search evidence can feed multiple downstream aggregates; and aggregate outputs are executed in topological waves before being com-bined by the terminal answer node. 

5 Conclusion 

We introduced DecomposeR, a planner-centric framework for deep research that represents plans as typed DAGs and trains planner and answerer roles in separate RL stages. By assigning reward to explicit graph components, DecomposeR im-proves credit assignment for the planning process. The planner RL run shows strong gains in reward, validity, search breadth, aggregate branching, and cross-branch structure, supporting the core hypoth-esis that structured plans are a useful optimization target for deep research systems. The answerer RL run confirms that execution fidelity and synthesis quality are separable learning objectives. 6 Limitations 

The current system fixes the plan at graph revi-sion time and does not support iterative replan-ning after the answerer begins execution. In prin-ciple, partial evidence from early aggregate nodes could inform later search decisions, but this would require variable-length rollouts that make GRPO credit assignment substantially harder. The two-turn bounded planner is a deliberate tradeoff that preserves RL tractability; extending to adaptive replanning is a natural future direction. DecomposeR also depends on external search and fetched pages. Noisy, incomplete, or poorly ranked evidence can still propagate into the graph and final answer, and the current system does not perform a separate source-faithfulness verification step. Finally, the reward design uses fixed weights across several planner and answerer components. We keep these weights fixed for all experiments to avoid benchmark-specific tuning, but this may not be optimal across domains. In addition, several reward terms rely on embedding-based rubric or key-point matching, which can over-credit seman-tically similar but incomplete content. 

References 

Rahul K. Arora, Jason Wei, Rebecca Soskin Hicks, Pre-ston Bowman, Joaquin Quiñonero-Candela, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Michael Sharman, Meghan Shah, An-drea Vallone, Alex Beutel, Johannes Heidecke, and Karan Singhal. 2025. Healthbench: Evaluating large language models towards improved human health. 

Preprint , arXiv:2505.08775. Akari Asai, Jacqueline He, Rulin Shao, Weijia Shi, Amanpreet Singh, Joseph Chee Chang, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini, Sergey Feldman, Mike D’arcy, David Wadden, Matt Latzke, Minyang Tian, Pan Ji, Shengyan Liu, Hao Tong, Bohao Wu, Yanyu Xiong, Luke Zettlemoyer, and 6 others. 2024a. Openscholar: Synthesizing scientific literature with retrieval-augmented lms. Preprint , arXiv:2411.14199. Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avi Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024b. Self-rag: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International conference on learning representa-tions , volume 2024, pages 9112–9141. Mingyang Chen, Linzhuang Sun, Tianpeng Li, Haoze Sun, Chenzheng Zhu, Haofen Wang, Jeff Pan, Wen Zhang, Huajun Chen, Fan Yang, and 1 others. 2026. Learning to reason with search for llms via reinforce-ment learning. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 38:85287–85307. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and 1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 .Mingxuan Du, Benfeng Xu, Chiwei Zhu, Xiaorui Wang, and Zhendong Mao. 2025. Deepresearch bench: A comprehensive benchmark for deep research agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11763 .Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2106.09685. Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023. Active retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 7969–7992. Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan O. Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. 2025. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learn-ing. In Proceedings of the Conference on Language Modeling .Tushar Khot, Harsh Trivedi, Matthew Finlayson, Yao Fu, Kyle Richardson, Peter Clark, and Ashish Sab-harwal. 2023. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Ef-ficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. Preprint ,arXiv:2309.06180. Kuan Li, Zhongwang Zhang, Huifeng Yin, Liwen Zhang, Litu Ou, Jialong Wu, Wenbiao Yin, Baix-uan Li, Zhengwei Tao, Xinyu Wang, Weizhou Shen, Junkai Zhang, Dingchu Zhang, Xixi Wu, Yong Jiang, Ming Yan, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. Websailor: Navigating super-human rea-soning for web agent. Preprint , arXiv:2507.02592. Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Guanting Dong, Hongjin Qian, Yongkang Wu, Ji-Rong Wen, Yutao Zhu, and Zhicheng Dou. 2026a. Webthinker: Empowering large reasoning models with deep research capability. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,38:120091–120131. Zijian Li, Xin Guan, Bo Zhang, Shen Huang, Houquan Zhou, Shaopeng Lai, Ming Yan, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Jun Zhang, and Jingren Zhou. 2026b. Webweaver: Structuring web-scale evidence with dynamic outlines for open-ended deep research. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Junteng Liu, Yunji Li, Chi Zhang, Jingyang Li, Aili Chen, Ke Ji, Weiyu Cheng, Zijia Wu, Chengyu Du, Qidi Xu, Jiayuan Song, Zhengmao Zhu, Wenhu Chen, Pengyu Zhao, and Junxian He. 2025. Webexplorer: Explore and evolve for training long-horizon web agents. Preprint , arXiv:2509.06501. Jianbiao Mei, Tao Hu, Daocheng Fu, Licheng Wen, Xue-meng Yang, Rong Wu, Pinlong Cai, Xinyu Cai, Xing Gao, Yu Yang, Chengjun Xie, Botian Shi, Yong Liu, and Yu Qiao. 2025. O 2-searcher: A searching-based agent model for open-domain open-ended question answering. Preprint , arXiv:2505.16582. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing deep research. https: //openai.com/index/introducing-deep-resea rch/ .Perplexity Team. 2025. Introducing perplexity deep research. https://www.perplexity.ai/hub/bl og/introducing-perplexity-deep-research .Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemati-cal reasoning in open language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.03300. Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. 2025. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Sys-tems , EuroSys ’25, page 1279–1297. ACM. Amanpreet Singh, Joseph Chee Chang, Dany Haddad, Aakanksha Naik, Jena D Hwang, Rodney Kinney, Daniel S Weld, Doug Downey, and Sergey Feldman. 2025. AI2 scholar QA: Organized literature synthesis with attribution. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations) , pages 513–523. Huatong Song, Jinhao Jiang, Yingqian Min, Jie Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Wayne Xin Zhao, Lei Fang, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. R1-searcher: Incentivizing the search capability in llms via reinforcement learning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.05592. Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2023. Interleaving retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , pages 10014–10037. Lei Wang, Wanyu Xu, Yihuai Lan, Zhiqiang Hu, Yunshi Lan, Roy Ka-Wei Lee, and Ee-Peng Lim. 2023. Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language models. In Pro-ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Shu Zhao, Tan Yu, Anbang Xu, Japinder Singh, Aaditya Shukla, and Rama Akkiraju. 2025. Parallelsearch: Train your llms to decompose query and search sub-queries in parallel with reinforcement learning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.09303. Appendix A Training Details 

A.1 Training Data Sources 

Table 3 gives the exact source breakdown for the filtered long-form training pool and the artifacts derived from it. The active training sets contain 2,325 SFT queries, converted into 10,532 supervised turns, and a shared 1,432-query RL set used by both planner RL and answerer RL. Candidate split and rubric columns are included to document data construction. Source Pool SFT candidates SFT used RL candidates Rubrics generated RL used OpenScholar 2,577 1,639 1,554 938 899 897 SearchArena 1,039 630 558 409 404 403 ScholarQA 384 231 213 153 132 132 Total queries/artifacts 4,000 2,500 2,325 1,500 1,435 1,432 

> Table 3: Training data source breakdown. “SFT used” counts planner–answerer teacher trajectories used for cold-start SFT. “Rubrics generated” counts generated query-specific rubrics. “RL used” counts the shared prepared query set used by both planner RL and answerer RL.

A.2 Masked GRPO Objective 

This subsection expands the Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) training protocol summarized in Section 4.1 (Shao et al., 2024). Search-RL systems such as Search-R1 and ReSearch adapt GRPO to tool environments by treating retrieved text as environment output and masking it out of the policy-gradient loss (Jin et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2026); O 2-Searcher further uses GRPO with composite rewards for open-ended search tasks (Mei et al., 2025). DecomposeR follows the same separation principle, but the model-generated objects are typed planner graphs and answerer node reports rather than inline search traces. 

Masked GRPO objective. For each input query or prepared answerer artifact x, the old policy samples a group of G rollouts {τi}Gi=1 ∼ πθold (·| x). Each rollout receives a scalar stage reward Ri: Ri = Rplan 

for planner RL and Ri = Rans for answerer RL. We use the full clipped GRPO objective of Shao et al. (2024), with the token average restricted to the model-generated assistant tokens: 

JGRPO (θ) = E

 1

G

> G

X

> i=1

1

|M i|

X

> t∈M i

n

min 



ρi,t bAi, clip( ρi,t , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) bAi



− β bDi,t 

> KL

o ,ρi,t = πθ(yi,t |hi,t )

πθold (yi,t |hi,t ) , bAi = Ri − 1

> G

PGj=1 Rj

std( {Rj }Gj=1 ) + δ ,

bDi,t  

> KL

= πref (yi,t |hi,t )

πθ(yi,t |hi,t ) − log 

 πref (yi,t |hi,t )

πθ(yi,t |hi,t )



− 1.

(16) Here hi,t is the full dialogue context before token yi,t , ϵ is the PPO-style clip range, β is the KL coefficient, and δ is a small numerical constant. The term bDi,t  

> KL

is the positive KL estimator used by GRPO; unlike RLHF formulations that add a per-token KL penalty into the reward, this form regularizes the policy directly in the objective. No learned critic or value head is used; the group mean and standard deviation provide the baseline and scale. Since our rewards are trajectory-level stage rewards, the same normalized advantage is assigned to every unmasked policy token in the rollout. The mask Mi contains only policy-generated assistant tokens. For planner RL, this includes the planner 

<think> tokens, graph JSON, revision JSON, and fetch-request JSON. For answerer RL, this includes the answerer <think> tokens and XML <node> blocks for aggregate waves and the final answer. System prompts, user payloads, Jina search results, Serper fetch contents, compact dependency payloads, and citation catalogs are conditioned on but excluded from the policy-gradient and KL terms. This is the DecomposeR analogue of retrieved-token masking in inline search-agent rollouts. 

A.3 Training Hyper-parameters 

Tables 4 and 5 report the cold-start SFT and RL hyper-parameters used in the reported run. All training stages were run on a single node with 8 x NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000 GPUs, each with 96GB of memory.            

> Setting Cold-start SFT Maximum sequence length 16,384 tokens Epochs 2Learning rate 1.0×10 −5
> Batching per-device batch size 1; gradient accumulation 8 Temperature for rollout sampling 1.0 Optimizer and schedule fused AdamW, cosine schedule Weight decay 0.0 Precision and memory BF16, gradient checkpointing, DeepSpeed ZeRO-2

Table 4: Cold-start SFT hyper-parameters.                                                

> Setting Planner RL Answerer RL Starting checkpoint Turn-level SFT merged checkpoint Planner-RL merged checkpoint Rollout backend VERL with vLLM rollouts VERL with vLLM rollouts Model dtype BF16 BF16 LoRA rank 64 64 LoRA alpha 128 128 Unique prompts per batch 84Rollouts per prompt (group size) 66Mini-batch size 42Mini-batches per GRPO step 22Inner epochs per batch 11Max prompt length in tokens 4,096 8,192 Max response length in tokens 8,192 16,384 Max tokens in packed sequence 12,288 28,672 Temperature for sampling rollouts 1.0 1.0 Top-pfor sampling rollouts 1.0 1.0 KL coefficient β0.001 0.005 Learning rate schedule constant, no warmup constant, no warmup Learning rate 4.0×10 −64.0×10 −6
> Weight decay 0.0 0.0 Environment Jina Search, up to five results per search node; Offline Serper fetch, up to four URLs Offline prepared planner graphs, search results, fetched pages, and citation cata-log

Table 5: GRPO hyper-parameters used for the two RL stages. 

A.4 Benchmark Evaluation Details DeepResearchBench. We evaluated all 100 DeepResearchBench prompts, consisting of 50 Chinese and 50 English tasks from the official query file. Following the benchmark protocol, we generated one cited long-form report per prompt, ran the official RACE and FACT evaluation pipelines separately for the Chinese, English, and combined outputs. RACE was judged with the official DeepResearchBench LLM judge using openai/gpt-5.5 , while the auxiliary FACT pipeline used openai/gpt-5.4-mini ; the main results table reports the combined RACE score. 

ResearchQA-Mini. We evaluated the full 776-question test_mini split of ResearchQA-Mini. The generated reports were exported in the expected ResearchQA response-map format and scored with the official recommended rubric-coverage judge used by the evaluation wrapper, gpt-4.1-mini .HealthBench. We evaluated 500 samples sampled from the official HealthBench dataset, including 100 prompts from the hard subset under a hard-sampling fraction of 20 %, consistent with the original ratio. Generated completions were attached back to the original HealthBench rows and graded with the official 

simple-evals HealthBench rubric implementation using the recommended gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 as the grader. 

A.5 Planner and Answerer Reward Details                               

> Symbol Description Value
> Planner top-level (Eq. 5)
> λcov Rubric coverage weight 0.40
> λsearch Search quality weight 0.30
> λgraph Graph expressiveness weight 0.30
> Search quality sub-weights
> λsearch ,cov Search rubric coverage 0.50
> λsearch ,dist Search distinctness 0.50
> Graph expressiveness sub-weights
> λgraph ,synth Synthesis breadth 0.40
> λgraph ,cross Cross-branch integration 0.40
> λgraph ,search Search breadth 0.20
> Answerer top-level (Eq. 12)
> λexec Execution reward weight 0.50
> λsynth Synthesis reward weight 0.50
> Execution sub-weights
> λexec ,emb Embedding key-point match 0.50
> λexec ,lex Lexical key-point recall 0.50
> Synthesis sub-weights
> λsynth ,judge LLM final-answer rubric judge 0.50
> λsynth ,util Deterministic branch-token utilization 0.50

Table 6: All reward weights used in the planner and answerer RL stages. 

Table 6 separates weights by the object they score. Planner terms are applied to the revised graph before any final answer is written, while answerer terms are applied to generated node reports and the terminal answer under a fixed graph. Throughout this subsection, G = ( N , E) denotes the revised planner graph, Ns ⊂ N denotes its search nodes, Na ⊂ N denotes its aggregate nodes, and vans denotes the terminal answer node. The function ϕ(·) is the sentence-embedding encoder used for reward-side semantic matching, cos( ·, ·) is cosine similarity in that embedding space, and max(0 , cos( ·, ·)) clamps negative similarities to zero. 

Planner-stage reward. The planner rollout consists of an initial graph, environment search results, and a planner revision that emits the final graph and fetch requests. Only the revised graph G is rewarded. Invalid graphs receive zero reward: 

Rplan = 1[Valid( G)] (0 .40 Crub + 0 .30 Qsearch + 0 .30 Egraph ) . (17) Here 1[Valid( G)] is one only when the revised graph parses and satisfies the typed-DAG constraints; otherwise the planner reward is zero. The three terms correspond to distinct planner responsibilities: Crub 

checks whether the plan creates places for the rubric content to be answered later, Qsearch checks whether the search nodes expose useful and non-duplicative retrieval routes, and Egraph checks whether the graph contains enough reusable synthesis structure for the answerer to execute. For a rubric item u with weight 

wu, let fields( n) be the non-empty query , key_points , and need fields of a non-answer node n. Rubric coverage Crub is the weighted average best match from each rubric item to any searchable or aggregate plan field: 

Crub =

P 

> u

wu max n∈N \{ vans } max c∈fields( n) max(0 , cos( ϕ(u), ϕ (c))) 

P 

> u

wu

. (18) Search quality is 

Qsearch = 0 .50 Csearch + 0 .50 Dsearch , (19) where Csearch is computed like Crub but restricted to search-node queries. Let qi be the query string emitted by the ith search node in Ns. The distinctness term Dsearch is one minus the mean clamped cosine similarity over unordered pairs of search queries: 

Dsearch = 1 − 2

|N s|(|N s| − 1) 

X

> i<j

max(0 , cos( ϕ(qi), ϕ (qj ))) . (20) When there are fewer than two search queries, Dsearch is set to zero. Thus Csearch rewards query-level recall of important facets, while Dsearch discourages multiple search nodes from becoming paraphrases of the same retrieval request. Graph expressiveness is 

Egraph = 0 .40 Bsynth + 0 .40 Icross + 0 .20 Bsearch . (21) All three subterms use the diminishing-returns function f (k) = max(0 , 1 − 1/ max( k, 1)) . Let Pans be the set of aggregate parents of the answer node and dpar be one minus the mean pairwise normalized cosine similarity among their node texts. Then 

Bsynth = f (|Pans |) dpar , (22) 

Icross = 12 (rfan + rint ), (23) 

Bsearch = f (|N s|), (24) where Bsynth measures how many distinct aggregate branches feed the answer, Icross measures cross-branch connectivity, and Bsearch measures search breadth. The term rfan is the fraction of search nodes with at least two direct downstream children, so it rewards evidence reuse across branches. The term 

rint is the fraction of aggregate nodes with at least two parent inputs, so it rewards synthesis nodes that combine evidence or upstream conclusions. The diminishing-returns function gives most of its gain when moving from one to two useful branches or search nodes, then saturates as counts grow; the diversity multiplier dpar prevents duplicate answer-parent branches from increasing Bsynth cheaply. 

Answerer-stage reward. The answerer rollout executes the fixed planner graph in topological aggregate waves and then writes the terminal answer node. For a fully parsed trajectory, 

Rans = 0 .50 Rexec + 0 .50 Rsynth . (25) The execution term is local to aggregate nodes: it asks whether each branch report fulfilled the key points declared by the planner. The synthesis term is reserved for the terminal answer, so missing branch coverage and poor final integration affect different parts of the reward. Only aggregate nodes are scored for execution. For each aggregate node v with key points Pv and generated node text ov,

rv = 0 .50 Kemb (v) + 0 .50 Klex (v). (26) A high rv therefore means that a node report covers its assigned content targets, not merely that it is fluent or long. Here Pv is the set of planner-declared key points for aggregate node v, and ov is the generated XML node text for that aggregate. The embedding term Kemb (v) is the greedy one-to-one matching score between key points p ∈ Pv and output sentences s from ov, normalized by the number of key points: 

Kemb (v) = 1

|Pv|

X

> (p,s )∈match( v)

max(0 , cos( ϕ(p), ϕ (s))) . (27) The lexical term strips inline citations and averages key-point token recall. Here tok( ·) denotes the set of normalized content tokens after citation removal: 

Klex (v) = 1

|Pv|

X

> p∈Pv

|tok( p) ∩ tok( ov)||tok( p)| . (28) The embedding term gives credit for semantic coverage of key points, while the lexical term provides a deterministic guard against high semantic similarity without concrete key-point content. Node scores are combined with the shifted harmonic mean 

Rexec = |N a|

P

> v∈N a
> 11+ rv

− 1. (29) This preserves sensitivity to weak branches without turning one failed branch into a total zero reward. We use the shifted harmonic mean rather than a min operator because early experiments with a hard minimum made GRPO advantage estimates unstable under small group sizes. Synthesis reward combines an LLM rubric judge and deterministic branch utilization: 

Rsynth = 0 .50 Jrub + 0 .50 Ubranch . (30) These two subterms separate external answer quality from structural fidelity: Jrub measures whether the final report satisfies the query-level rubric, while Ubranch checks whether the final report actually uses the branch reports produced during graph execution. The judge term Jrub is a rubric-weighted average of five-level scores {0, 0.25 , 0.5, 0.75 , 1} returned by the configured judge ( gpt-5-mini in the reported run). The five-level scale is used because coarser three-level scales merge adjacent rubric-satisfaction levels, while broader numeric scales introduce more calibration noise across queries. Branch utilization is 

Ubranch = 1

|B|

X

> b∈B

|tok( b) ∩ tok( y)||tok( b)| , (31) where B is the set of aggregate branch outputs and y is the final answer, both after stripping inline citations. Each branch output b ∈ B is one completed aggregate-node report. This term is deterministic and targets the failure mode in which the answerer ignores its completed branch reports and writes the final answer directly from parametric knowledge or retrieved evidence. All reward-side semantic matching uses the sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2 embedding model (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019). 

Partial credit for parse failures. Planner parse or graph-validity failures receive zero because the planner reward is defined on a valid typed DAG. Answerer parse failures are handled differently: if some aggregate waves have already completed, missing aggregate nodes are assigned zero node scores and the rollout receives 0.50 Rexec with Rsynth = 0 ; if the final answer fails to parse after all aggregate waves succeed, it receives the same execution credit with zero synthesis. If no aggregate node is successfully parsed, the reward remains zero. This change was used because fully zeroing a long answerer rollout after a late XML parse error produced unstable GRPO advantages despite useful completed branch reports. A.6 Training Diagnostics 

Figures 4 and 5 report the two training diagnostics omitted from the main text for space. The planner graph curve shows that planner RL does not merely improve scalar reward: it also increases typed graph structure, with edge count growing faster than node count as the model learns to reuse evidence across branches. The answerer length curve shows that responses become longer during answerer RL. We interpret this as a consequence of key-point coverage pressure rather than length reward hacking, since the active reward has no direct length term and the reward curve in Figure 3 tracks execution and synthesis improvements.          

> 050 100 150 200 250 300
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> RL step
> mean count
> Graph Size by Step
> nodes search aggregate edges

Figure 4: Planner graph size and typed component counts over RL.        

> 050 100 150 200 250 300 350
> 7,000
> 8,000
> 9,000
> 10 ,000
> RL step
> mean tokens
> Answerer Response Length

Figure 5: Answerer response length over RL. A.7 Reward Component Ablations 

We ablate the planner and answerer reward components separately, removing one component at a time from the full reward and retraining from the SFT checkpoint with the same schedule, data, and fixed weights on the remaining components. Results are reported in Table 7. 

C1: Planner reward components. The top half of Table 7 reports leave-one-out ablations of the three top-level planner reward terms. Removing rubric coverage Crub causes the largest drop on ResQA-Mini, whose rubric-based evaluations directly reward semantic coverage of specific aspects. Removing search quality Qsearch degrades all three benchmarks, falling from 51.7 to 49.1 on average, confirming that this term shapes retrieval coverage rather than only acting as a noise term. Removing graph expressiveness 

Egraph has a sizeable effect on final answer scores and causes graphs to collapse toward less integrated, simpler structures. This contrasts with the full planner-RL diagnostic in Figure 4, where edge count grows faster than node count, indicating increasing cross-branch reuse. 

C2: Answerer reward components. The bottom half of Table 7 reports the same ablation for the answerer reward. Removing per-aggregate execution reward Rexec causes branch-level key-point coverage to drop substantially, resulting in the largest drop-off across all answerer sub-components. Removing the rubric judge Jrub reduces final answer quality on all three benchmarks. The branch utilization term 

Ubranch has the smallest standalone effect on benchmark scores, but when removed the content overlap between the final answer and intermediate branch outputs drops from 0.82 to 0.61, indicating that without 

Ubranch the answerer increasingly ignores its own branch outputs and re-derives the final report from scratch.                                    

> Variant DRBench HealthBench ResQA-Mini
> C1: Planner reward components
> Full Rplan 41.8 42.0 71.4
> w/o Crub 36.3 37.9 65.2 w/o Qsearch 38.9 39.7 68.8 w/o Egraph 34.1 35.8 66.3
> C2: Answerer reward components
> Full Rans 41.8 42.0 71.4
> w/o Rexec 36.1 31.9 62.8 w/o Jrub 38.0 39.3 69.8 w/o Ubranch 40.5 41.3 70.3

Table 7: Leave-one-out ablation of reward components. All variants keep the fixed reward weights on remaining components unchanged. 

A.8 Plan Representation and Revision Ablations 

This ablation complements the reward-component analysis in Appendix A.7 by isolating two structural choices in the planner: whether the plan is a typed DAG rather than a weaker linear or tree structure, and whether the planner can revise the plan after seeing search results. Results are reported in Table 8. 

D1: Plan structure ablation. We replace the typed DAG with two alternative plan representations while retaining the rest of the DecomposeR training pipeline. Linear : the plan consists of search nodes feeding directly into the answer node with no aggregate layer, approximating the parallel-subquery structures used by ParallelSearch and SubSearch; the graph expressiveness reward Egraph is removed because there is no DAG structure to score, leaving Crub and Qsearch active. Tree : aggregate nodes are restricted to at most one parent, approximating hierarchical outline structures of WebWeaver-style systems; the structural rewards remain active but rint in Icross is necessarily zero. The top half of Table 8 shows that the typed DAG outperforms both Linear and Tree on every benchmark, with the largest gap on tasks that require synthesizing evidence across multiple thematic branches. 

D2: Single-turn vs. two-turn planning. We further ablate the two-turn planner protocol by training a single-turn variant in which the planner emits G0 and immediately commits to it, with no opportunity to revise after seeing search results. The bottom half of Table 8 shows that two-turn planning improves over single-turn planning on all three benchmarks, consistent with the intuition that an initial plan generated from parametric knowledge alone benefits from being adjusted to what is actually retrievable.                   

> Variant DRBench HealthBench ResQA-Mini
> D1: Plan structure
> Linear 34.2 31.5 57.8 Tree 38.6 39.8 65.3
> Typed DAG (Ours) 41.8 42.0 71.4
> D2: Planner revision
> Single-turn planning 35.1 36.7 67.5
> Two-turn planning (Ours) 41.8 42.0 71.4

Table 8: Plan representation ablations. D1 replaces the typed DAG with a linear (parallel-subquery) or tree (hierarchical outline) structure. D2 disables the revision turn that follows initial search. 

B Prompt and Rollout Appendix 

This appendix records the exact system prompts used by the DecomposeR pipeline and a model-output rollout from the final 8B model. Planner JSON, evidence payloads, and long answerer text are excerpted to avoid printing full fetched pages or repetitive answer prose; the graph, turn flow, execution waves, final answer structure, and citation catalog are preserved. 

B.1 Execution and SFT Prompts 

This subsection groups the static system prompts and turn-specific user payloads used for production rollouts and cold-start SFT. The initial planner turn receives only the raw query; after search, the planner receives a structured revision payload. The answerer then receives aggregate-wave payloads and a final-answer payload. The SFT corpus stores these same prompt/completion turns from teacher trajectories. 

Planner prompts.          

> You are the planner for a graph-based deep research system. The same underlying model is used for planning and answering, but this planner role is only responsible for: 1. proposing or revising the research graph 2. choosing which URLs are worth fetching after search results are visible You do not write the final answer. Every planner response must follow this pattern: 1. a very brief `<think> `block 2. the required JSON object Keep the `<think> `block short. One or two sentences is enough. Do not write a long hidden monologue. Planner graph rules: - support multiple branches - allow cross-links when the graph remains a Directec Acyclic Graph (DAG) - allow aggregate nodes with multiple parents - allow search nodes that feed more than one aggregate - allow intermediate aggregate nodes - end with exactly one terminal `answer `node Allowed node types: -`search `
> -`aggregate `
> -`answer `
> Allowed edge types:

- `enables `

- `compares `

- `extends `

- `requires `

- `contextualizes `

Node requirements: - Every `search ` node needs: - `id `

- `type `

- `need `

- `query `

- Every `aggregate ` node needs: - `id `

- `type `

- `need `

- `key_points `

- `inputs `

- Every `answer ` node needs: - `id `

- `type `

- `need `

- `inputs ``key_points ` rules for aggregate nodes: - must be present on every aggregate node - should contain between 2 to 6 items - each item should be a concrete content target, not a vague heading - together they should define what a strong local mini-report must cover General planning rules: - search queries should be operationalized subproblems, not paraphrases of the user query - aggregate nodes should be meaningful mini-reports, not vague buckets - the final answer node should synthesize across multiple branches instead of restating one branch - keep the graph acyclic - do not invent URLs - do not output any prose outside the `<think> ` block and the required JSON - the edge type should reflect how the search query can help address the aggregate node 's needs Turn 1: - read the user query - propose an initial graph - prefer 4 to 5 search nodes for most deep research queries unless the task clearly needs more Turn 1 output schema: 

<think> ...[brief planning note]... </think> 

{"graph": { "nodes": [ {"id": "N1", "type": "search", "need": "specific information need", "query": "concrete search query" }, {"id": "N4", "type": "aggregate", "need": "specific branch report need", "key_points": [ "point one", "point two", "point three" ], "inputs": ["N1", "N2"] }, {"id": "N7", "type": "answer", "need": "integrated final answer need", "inputs": ["N5", "N6"] }], "edges": [ {"source": "N1", "target": "N4", "type": "enables" }]}}Turn 2: - you will receive the current graph and executed search results - keep or revise the graph based on the search results and newly-acquired knowledge - choose the few URLs most worth fetching - any new search nodes you add in the revised graph will be executed after this turn - choose ONLY URLs that already appear in the provided search results - fetch sparingly Turn 2 revision rules: - you may revise the structure of the graph in multiple ways (e.g. add missing branches if the search evidence reveals a distinct missing sub-problem, further diverging a single branch or combining multiple branches, adding new search nodes etc.) - preserve a valid DAG - keep `key_points ` strong and specific after revision Turn 2 output schema: 

<think> ...[brief revision note]... </think> 

{"action": "keep|revise", "revised_graph": { "nodes": [...], "edges": [...] }, "fetch_requests": [ {"source_node_id": "N1", "url": "https://example.com/page", "reason": "why this page is worth fetching" }]}Small example of good aggregate `key_points `:- weak: ["background", "implications"] - better: - "how obesity treatment guidelines changed after 2021" - "semaglutide and tirzepatide adoption timeline" - "what changed for payer and provider behavior" Return only: - one brief `<think> ` block - one JSON object 

Figure 6: Planner system prompt 

{"phase": "planner_after_search", "query": "{user query}", "current_graph": "{initial graph, with search/aggregate/answer nodes}", "max_fetches": 4, "search_results": "{Jina search results keyed by source search node}", "instruction": "Review the evidence. Keep or revise the graph, then choose the few URLs most worth fetching. Choose only from the provided search results. Fetch sparingly. Revise the graph if the current branches under-separate distinct analytical tasks, if any aggregate node is overloaded, or if the evidence suggests a missing branch. If you add new search nodes, they will be executed after this turn. Every aggregate node must keep specific `key_points ` with 2-6 items." }

Figure 7: Planner revision-turn user payload 

Answerer prompts. 

You are the answerer and executor for a graph-based deep research system. The planner role is already complete. You do not revise the graph. You do not choose fetches. You do not open new searches. Your job is to execute the already-planned graph in topological order. Execution model: - the environment gives you one execution wave at a time - each execution wave may contain multiple same-level aggregate nodes - you must complete every target node in that wave in a single answerer turn - after upstream aggregates exist, you will later receive a final turn for the terminal answer node Dependency format: - execution turns may provide `shared_dependencies ` once at the top level instead of repeating them under every target node - each target node tells you which dependency ids it may use through `dependency_refs `

- if a dependency has `provision: inline `, its evidence is included in the current turn - if a dependency has `provision: history_reference `, its full content was already provided earlier in the conversation and is not repeated here - use only the dependency ids referenced for the current target node Evidence discipline: - use only the evidence provided or referenced for each target node - do not borrow facts from sibling nodes unless that content is explicitly included in the target node 's dependencies - if evidence is thin or mixed, say so directly - do not add unsupported facts What strong aggregate outputs look like: - substantial independent deep-research reports, not terse notes - tightly aligned to the node `need `

- clearly and extensively cover the node `key_points `

- elaborate and synthesize on the provided parents instead of listing them mechanically - use inline citations for factual claims with the exact evidence ids provided in the prompt, such as `[N3-R2] ` or `[N1-F1] `

What strong final answers look like: - integrate the completed branch reports into a coherent stand-alone report - preserve the distinctions and conclusions established upstream - answer the user query directly, not just summarize the graph - be extended long-form and detailed by default for deep-research queries - use clear sections and sustained reasoning instead of short summary prose - preserve and reuse inline evidence citations from the aggregate reports Every answerer response must follow this pattern: 1. a very brief `<think> ` block 2. one or more XML node blocks Keep the `<think> ` block short. One or two sentences is enough. Execution-turn output format: 

<think> brief execution note </think> <node id="N3"> deep-research report for node N3 

</node> 

<node id="N4"> deep-research report for node N4 

</node> 

Final answer output format: 

<think> brief synthesis note </think> 

<node id="N11"> final integrated deep-research answer 

</node> 

Rules for XML node blocks: - emit exactly one `<node ...> ` block per required target node - the `id ` must match exactly - do not wrap the nodes in JSON - do not add commentary before, between, or after node blocks except the single brief `<think> `

block - do not add a citation bibliography or source block; use inline citations only Small example for a two-node execution wave: 

<think> I should handle the market-structure branch and the governance branch separately, using only their own dependencies. </think> 

<node id="N5"> Report for N5... 

</node> 

<node id="N6"> Report for N6... 

</node> 

Return only: - one brief `<think> ` block - the required `<node> ` blocks 

Figure 8: Answerer system prompt 

{"phase": "answer_execution", "payload_variant": "compact", "query": "{user query}", "graph": "{revised graph}", "execution_wave": { "index": 1, "target_node_ids": ["N7", "N8"] }, "shared_dependencies": [ {"parent_id": "N1", "parent_type": "search", "provision": "inline|history_reference", "available_citation_ids": ["N1-R1", "N1-F1"], "evidence_items": "{included only when provision=inline}" }], "target_nodes": [ {"id": "N7", "type": "aggregate", "need": "{node need}", "key_points": ["{point one}", "{point two}"], "dependency_refs": [ {"parent_id": "N1", "parent_type": "search", "edge_type": "enables", "instruction": "Use the following as direct supporting evidence:" }]}], "instruction": "Complete every target aggregate node in this wave..." }

Figure 9: Answerer aggregate-wave user payload 

{"phase": "answer_final", "query": "{user query}", "graph": "{revised graph}", "target_node": { "id": "N11", "type": "answer", "need": "{final answer need}" }, "branch_reports": [ {"node_id": "N7", "need": "{upstream branch need}", "report_snippet": "{short branch-report preview}", "citation_ids_present": ["N1-R1", "N3-F1"], "full_report_available_in_conversation": true }], "instruction": "Write the terminal answer node using only the provided branch reports. Start with a very brief `<think> ` block, then emit exactly one `<node id=\"...\">... </node> ` block for the final answer node and nothing else. Integrate the branches into a coherent, polished answer without re-opening retrieval or adding unsupported facts. For deep-research queries, default to a long, detailed answer with clear sections, explicit synthesis, and sustained reasoning rather than a short summary. Preserve and reuse the inline evidence citation ids already established in the upstream branch reports." }

Figure 10: Answerer final-answer user payload 

SFT trajectory generation. The same planner and answerer prompts above are used for cold-start SFT trajectory generation. Teacher rollouts follow the production sequence: the planner first receives the raw query and emits an initial graph; the environment executes the initial search nodes; the planner then receives the after-search payload, revises the graph, and selects URLs to fetch; the environment executes any newly added searches and fetches the selected pages; and the answerer executes aggregate waves and the terminal answer node using the answerer prompts above. The turn-level SFT corpus stores the resulting planner and answerer chat turns as prompt/completion examples. 

B.2 Judge and Reward Prompts 

The answerer synthesis reward uses two terms: the LLM final-answer rubric judge below and deterministic branch utilization. Branch utilization is computed as the mean fraction of each aggregate branch’s content tokens that appear in the final answer, after stripping inline citations; it does not call an LLM judge and has no prompt. 

You create evaluation rubrics for deep research questions. Your job is to write 8-10 distinct rubric items that together capture what a strong deep-research answer must do. Requirements: - Rubrics must be specific to the query, not generic boilerplate. - Rubrics should be non-overlapping as far as possible. - Rubrics should cover substantive facets, evidence quality, synthesis quality, caveats, and practical usefulness when relevant. - Each rubric needs: - `title `: short label - `description `: one precise sentence explaining what must be covered - Avoid style-only rubrics unless structure is essential for the query. Return JSON only: {"rubrics": [ {"title": "Facet name", "description": "What a strong answer must cover." }]}

Figure 11: Rubric generation system prompt 

You are grading a deep research answer against query-specific rubrics. You will receive: - the user query - the final answer - a list of rubrics Score each rubric independently using exactly one of these five scores: - `0`: not covered -- the rubric is absent, wrong, or unsupported - `0.25 `: minimally covered -- the rubric is touched on but mostly inadequate - `0.5 `: partially covered -- the rubric is addressed but with notable gaps or weak support - `0.75 `: mostly covered -- the rubric is substantively addressed with minor gaps - `1`: fully covered -- the rubric is clearly and completely satisfied Rules: - judge each rubric independently - score substance, specificity, and support, not writing style - do not reward confident language if the answer is vague or unsupported - use the full five-level range when distinctions are meaningful - use `0.25 ` when the answer only gestures at a rubric without useful substance - use `0.5 ` when the answer addresses the rubric but leaves notable gaps - use `0.75 ` when the answer covers the rubric well but has minor gaps or weak support - use `1` only when the rubric is clearly satisfied with specific, well-supported content Return JSON only: {"judgements": [ {"rubric_id": "R1", "score": 0 }]}

Figure 12: Answer judge system prompt C Example Planner–Answerer Rollout 

> How does nitrogen uptake by tree roots in agroforestry intercropping systems help reduce subsoil nitrogen leaching?
> Figure 13: User query

Abbreviation policy. This example keeps the control flow and graph structure intact while excerpting long evidence payloads and repetitive answer prose. The important structural property is that the revised graph has two aggregate execution waves before the final answer: N7–N9 are executed first, N10 is executed second, and the final answer consumes N7, N8, and N10. N9 therefore shapes the final report indirectly through N10 rather than as a direct parent of the answer node. 

Turn Flow. 

Turn Model / environment ac-tion Nodes or artifacts Planner turn 1 Emit initial typed DAG Search nodes N1–N5, aggregate nodes N6–N8, an-swer node N9. Environment Execute initial searches with Jina Search Search results attached to N1–N5. Planner turn 2 Revise graph and request fetches Adds search node N6, revises aggregate nodes N7– N10, answer node N11, and selects four fetches. Environment Execute new search and fetch selected pages with Serper New search: N6. Fetched evidence: N3-F1, N3-F2, N3-F3, N5-F4. Answerer wave 1Execute ready aggregate nodes N7: tree-root uptake and retention; N8: agroforestry nitrogen cycling; N9: preferential flow and soil trans-port. Answerer wave 2Execute dependent aggre-gate node N10: evidence that subsoil nitrogen leaching is re-duced by tree-root systems. Answerer final Write terminal answer node N11 integrated answer using N7, N8, and N10. 

> Table 9: Turn flow for the agroforestry nitrogen case-study rollout.

Revised Graph Summary. 

Node Type Need Inputs N1 search Mechanisms by which tree roots take up nitrogen and reduce nitrogen loss –N2 search Agroforestry intercropping systems and how they in-fluence nitrogen cycling –N3 search Evidence on subsoil nitrogen leaching reduction in agroforestry or tree-root systems –N4 search Role of root architecture, depth, and temporal dynam-ics in nitrogen capture –N5 search Soil water and nutrient transport processes affecting leaching –N6 search Direct evidence on preferential flow and how tree roots alter leaching pathways –Node Type Need Inputs N7 aggregate How tree roots reduce nitrogen loss through uptake and retention N1, N4 N8 aggregate How agroforestry intercropping changes nitrogen cy-cling and belowground environment N2, N5 N9 aggregate How preferential flow and soil transport processes influence leaching N5, N6 N10 aggregate Evidence that subsoil nitrogen leaching is reduced by tree-root systems N3, N5, N9 N11 answer Integrated explanation of how nitrogen uptake by tree roots in agroforestry intercropping reduces subsoil nitrogen leaching N7, N8, N10 

Table 10: Revised graph summary for the agroforestry nitrogen rollout. 

<think> 

I'll break this into mechanism, system-specific factors, and evidence branches, then synthesize them into one final answer. 

</think> 

{"graph": { "nodes": [ {"id": "N1", "type": "search", "need": "Mechanisms by which tree roots take up nitrogen and reduce nitrogen loss", "query": "tree root nitrogen uptake mechanisms nitrate ammonium root absorption mycorrhizae subsoil nitrogen retention"}, {"id": "N2", "type": "search", "need": "Agroforestry intercropping systems and how they influence nitrogen cycling", "query": "agroforestry intercropping nitrogen cycling legumes trees root biomass belowground dynamics"}, {"id": "N3", "type": "search", "need": "Evidence on subsoil nitrogen leaching reduction in agroforestry or tree-root systems", "query": "subsoil nitrogen leaching reduction agroforestry tree roots evidence review"}, ... {"id": "N9", "type": "answer", "need": "Integrated explanation of how nitrogen uptake by tree roots in agroforestry intercropping reduces subsoil nitrogen leaching", "inputs": ["N6", "N7", "N8"]} ], "edges": [ {"source": "N1", "target": "N6", "type": "enables"}, {"source": "N5", "target": "N8", "type": "contextualizes"}, ... ]}}

Figure 14: Planner initial output (abbreviated) Figure 15: Initial agroforestry nitrogen planner graph before search-result revision. Red nodes are search nodes, blue nodes are aggregate nodes, and the orange node is the terminal answer node. 

<think> 

I'll keep the overall structure but sharpen it around the evidence: add a separate branch for preferential flow and leaching pathways, and fetch the most authoritative direct sources. 

</think> 

{"action": "revise", "revised_graph": { "nodes": [ {"id": "N1", "type": "search", "need": "Mechanisms by which tree roots take up nitrogen and reduce nitrogen loss", "query": "tree root nitrogen uptake mechanisms nitrate ammonium root absorption mycorrhizae subsoil nitrogen retention"}, ... {"id": "N11", "type": "answer", "need": "Integrated explanation of how nitrogen uptake by tree roots in agroforestry intercropping reduces subsoil nitrogen leaching", "inputs": ["N7", "N8", "N10"]} ], "edges": [ {"source": "N5", "target": "N9", "type": "enables"}, {"source": "N9", "target": "N10", "type": "enables"}, {"source": "N10", "target": "N11", "type": "enables"}, ... ]}, "fetch_requests": [ {"source_node_id": "N3", "url": "https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13593 -022-00791-7", "reason": "High-level review with direct evidence on reduced N loss in agroforestry."}, {"source_node_id": "N3", "url": "https://www.nature.com/articles/s43016-022-00657-x", "reason ": "Specific evidence that deep tree rooting can catch subsoil inorganic N leached below cropland rooting zones."}, {"source_node_id": "N3", "url": "https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225134004 _Reduced_soil_nutrient_leaching_following_the_establishment_of_tree-based_intercropping_systems_in_eastern_Canada", "reason": "Direct study with quantified subsoil NO3 leaching reduction in tree-based intercropping."}, {"source_node_id": "N5", "url": "https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/ S0167198725001278", "reason": "Core source on preferential flow and transport pathways."} ]}

Figure 16: Planner revision output (abbreviated) Figure 17: Revised graph after search-result revision. 

{"phase": "answer_execution", "payload_variant": "compact", "execution_wave": {"index": 1, "target_node_ids": ["N7", "N8", "N9"]}, "shared_dependencies": [ {"parent_id": "N1", "parent_type": "search", "provision": "inline", "available_citation_ids": ["N1-R1", "N1-R3", "N1-R4"], "evidence_items": "[N1-R4] Nitrogen Journey in Plants... [search text truncated after excerpt] ..." }, {"parent_id": "N5", "parent_type": "search", "provision": "inline", "available_citation_ids": ["N5-R1", "N5-R2", "N5-F4"], "evidence_items": "[N5-F4] Characterization of preferential flow and transport pathways... [ page text truncated after excerpt] ..." }, ... ], "target_nodes": [ {"id": "N7", "dependency_refs": [{"parent_id": "N1"}, {"parent_id": "N4"}]}, {"id": "N8", "dependency_refs": [{"parent_id": "N2"}, {"parent_id": "N5"}]}, {"id": "N9", "dependency_refs": [{"parent_id": "N5"}, {"parent_id": "N6"}]} ]}

Figure 18: Answerer execution payload excerpt (abbreviated) 

<think> 

I will synthesize N7, N8, and N9 separately, using only the provided dependencies and keeping each branch focused. 

</think> 

<node id="N7"> Tree roots reduce nitrogen loss through uptake and retention by capturing different nitrogen forms and by structuring the soil in ways that intercept or store nitrogen before it can leach. The evidence shows that tree roots assimilate nitrate, ammonium, and organic nitrogen sources, including available amino acids [N1-R4]. ... 

</node> <node id="N8"> Agroforestry intercropping changes nitrogen cycling and the belowground environment by altering tree-root biomass, litter inputs, and the balance of competition and facilitation between crops and trees. Leguminous trees transfer organic compounds such as leaf litter, dead roots, and nodules to the soil, enriching the belowground nitrogen pool [N2-R4]. ... 

</node> 

<node id="N9"> Preferential flow and soil transport processes influence leaching by enabling rapid nutrient transport through macropores and by reducing the time solutes spend in the soil matrix. Preferential flow can bypass the soil matrix and move water and chemical substances over long distances [N5-F4]. ... 

</node> 

Figure 19: Answerer turn 1 excerpt: answer_execution (N7, N8, N9) 

<think> 

I'll synthesize the evidence for reduced subsoil nitrogen leaching using the provided direct studies and upstream transport branch. 

</think> 

<node id="N10"> The evidence base supports the claim that tree-root systems can reduce subsoil nitrogen leaching, but the strength of the evidence varies by study type and context. A review states that agroforestry practices almost consistently reduce nitrogen loss via erosion, runoff, and leaching [N3-F1]. A Nature Food review adds that deep tree rooting can catch and recycle subsoil inorganic nitrogen leached below crop rooting zones [N3-F2]. ... 

</node> 

Figure 20: Answerer turn 2 excerpt: answer_execution (N10) 

<think> 

I will integrate the three branch reports into one coherent explanation, preserving their evidence and distinctions. 

</think> 

<node id="N11"> ## Integrated explanation: how nitrogen uptake by tree roots in agroforestry intercropping reduces subsoil nitrogen leaching Tree roots in agroforestry intercropping systems reduce subsoil nitrogen leaching by capturing nitrogen directly from the soil, structuring the soil to intercept or retain nitrogen before it moves downward, and creating a belowground environment that alters nitrogen cycling and transport pathways. The evidence from the branch reports supports a multi-layered explanation: nitrogen is taken up in different forms, root architecture and depth influence where nitrogen is captured, and belowground interactions in intercropping systems change how nitrogen moves through the soil. At the same time, the evidence base shows that this effect is strongest under certain conditions, while exceptions and limitations exist. ---## 1) Tree roots capture nitrogen directly and intercept it before it can leach Tree roots reduce nitrogen loss by absorbing nitrogen from the soil, and the branch reports indicate that they take up several nitrogen forms. The evidence shows that tree roots assimilate nitrogen in the form of nitrate (NO3-), ammonium (NH4+), and organic nitrogen sources, including available amino acids [N1-R4]. A separate source also states that ammonium uptake is mediated by membrane proteins called ammonium transporters (AMTs) [N1-R3]. This means tree roots are not limited to one nitrogen form; they can respond dynamically to the dominant soil pool, but ammonium and nitrate are explicitly highlighted as major assimilation substrates [N1-R3][N1-R4]. Root architecture and depth are central to interception. The branch report says tree roots can structure the soil in ways that intercept or store nitrogen before it can leach, and it cites evidence that root architecture and depth influence nitrogen interception [N4-R1][N4-R4]. Another source in the evidence base notes that root distribution is shaped by nutrient availability and soil conditions, and that root depth is influenced by axial root production [ N5-F4]. This implies that deeper root systems are better positioned to capture nitrogen in the subsoil, while shallow roots may intercept nitrogen released by decomposing litter and organic matter [N4-R1][N4-R4]. The branch report also notes that root activity and associated belowground interactions enhance nitrogen retention [N2-R1][N2-R4]. While the evidence does not directly spell out mycorrhizal associations in the excerpted material, the broader context of nitrogen cycling in agroforestry systems implies that tree-root systems can extend nutrient uptake capacity and improve soil nitrogen retention through active root function and associated soil interactions [N1-R1][N1-R3][N2-R1][N2-R4]. In other words, tree roots do not simply absorb nitrogen once; they create conditions in which nitrogen is retained in the soil matrix or taken up before it can leach downward. ---## 2) Agroforestry intercropping changes nitrogen cycling and the belowground environment Agroforestry intercropping systems change nitrogen cycling by altering tree-root biomass, litter inputs, and the balance of competition and facilitation between crops and trees. The branch report states that agroforestry systems transfer organic compounds such as leaf litter, dead roots, and nodules to the soil, which enriches the belowground nitrogen pool [N2-R4]. This directly supports the idea that tree-root biomass and litter inputs increase soil nitrogen availability by adding organic nitrogen sources and creating a more nitrogen-rich belowground environment [N2-R4]. The branch report also says that belowground dynamics influence nitrogen cycling and crop productivity, with fine root nitrogen positively correlated to aboveground biomass [N2-R1]. This suggests that tree-root biomass itself contributes to nitrogen cycling by maintaining a belowground nitrogen sink and by influencing the availability of nitrogen for neighboring plants. The intercropping literature further shows that pruning tree canopies changes tree root spatial and temporal distribution, which allows annual crops to develop between the trees [N2-R2]. This pruning effect implies that tree-root distribution is not static; it can shift over time, altering the spatial organization of nitrogen availability and uptake [N2-R2]. Competition and facilitation between crops and trees alter nitrogen dynamics in several ways. The branch report notes that pruning changes root distribution and that root dynamics and belowground interactions are important in agroforestry systems [N2-R2][N2-R3]. This indicates that when trees are present, crops may compete for belowground resources, but pruning can shift the balance toward facilitation by redistributing root space and reducing direct competition [N2-R2][N2-R3]. The evidence also implies that intercropping systems create feedbacks through root biomass, litter inputs, and altered root distribution, which jointly shape nitrogen availability and cycling [N2-R1][N2-R4]. Belowground feedbacks in intercropping systems emerge through root biomass, litter inputs, and altered root distribution. The branch report says these feedbacks are important and that agroforestry systems can change how nitrogen is partitioned among crops and trees [N2-R1][N2-R2][N2-R3][N2-R4]. In other words, the presence of trees does not simply add nitrogen; it reorganizes the soil nitrogen pool and the way crops access nitrogen, often improving retention and reducing losses [N2-R1][N2-R4]. ---## 3) Preferential flow and soil transport processes can either accelerate leaching or be intercepted by tree roots The branch reports also show that soil water and nutrient transport processes are central to leaching. The evidence indicates that preferential flow is rapid movement bypassing the soil matrix, and that macropores serve as the main or sole channels for long-distance transport of water and chemical substances [N5-F4]. Another source defines preferential flow as non-equilibrium flow under various environmental conditions and emphasizes that it can promote rapid solution leaching below the root zone [N5-R2]. This means nitrogen is not evenly distributed through the soil; instead, it can move quickly through preferential pathways, especially when macropores are present [N5-R1][N5-R2][N5-F4]. Tree roots can intercept or redirect preferential flow by creating root pathways and macropores. The evidence notes that biological activities, including roots and soil fauna, form macropores in farmland [N5-F4]. It also states that trees can enhance preferential flow through macropores formed by their roots and associated soil fauna [N5-F4]. At the same time, the evidence suggests that root distribution and pruning can change root spatial and temporal distribution, which can influence how water and nutrients move through the soil profile [N2-R2 ][N5-F4]. This implies that tree roots do not passively allow preferential flow; they actively shape it by creating the physical pathways and altering the spatial arrangement of soil structure [N5-F4]. Soil structure and root distribution reduce leaching risk by modifying preferential flow connectivity and tortuosity. The evidence highlights that macropore structure strongly correlates with preferential flow and that preferential flow is affected by the connectivity and tortuosity of macropores [N5-F4]. It also notes that high macroporosity corresponds to a lower stained area ratio in tracer experiments, meaning that preferential flow is more localized and less widespread under certain conditions [N5-F4]. In addition, root architecture and distribution influence how nitrogen is intercepted and how water moves through the soil profile [N4-R1][N4-R4]. Taken together, these findings support the conclusion that soil structure and root distribution reduce leaching risk by limiting the spread of preferential flow and by increasing the time nitrogen spends in the soil matrix before reaching deeper layers [N5-F4][N5-R1][N5-R2]. ---## 4) Evidence that subsoil nitrogen leaching is reduced by tree-root systems The evidence base supports the claim that tree-root systems can reduce subsoil nitrogen leaching, but the strength of the evidence varies by study type and context. The most direct evidence comes from a meta-analytic review stating that agroforestry practices almost consistently show reductions in nitrogen loss via soil erosion, runoff, and leaching [N3-F1]. A second major review explicitly says that agroforestry systems can increase nitrate retention and mitigate the global impact of a leaky nitrogen cycle in croplands, with deep tree rooting able to catch and recycle subsoil inorganic nitrogen leached below the rooting zone of linked croplands [N3 -F2]. This is the clearest evidence that subsoil nitrogen leaching is reduced by tree-root systems. A third direct study reports that tree roots in a tree-based intercropping system established on clay loam soil decreased subsoil NO3- leaching by 227 kg N ha-1 and 30 kg N ha-1 over two consecutive years [N3-R5]. Taken together, these sources show that reduced subsoil nitrogen leaching is not just a theoretical possibility but a documented pattern under trees and tree-rooted systems [N3-F1][N3-F2][N3-R5]. The evidence also suggests that the effect is amplified under certain environmental and management conditions. The review on agroforestry notes that N loss reductions occur through soil erosion, runoff, and leaching, implying that the reduction is most visible when water and nutrient transport pathways are altered [N3-F1]. The subsoil nitrogen review emphasizes that deep tree rooting can catch nitrogen leached below the rooting zone of linked croplands, which suggests that the benefit is especially strong where there is a nearby cropland source of leached nitrogen and where trees extend their roots below that zone [N3-F2]. The direct intercropping study is set in clay loam soil, indicating that soil texture can matter for root development and leaching control [N3-R5]. The preferential flow background also shows that macropores and soil structure strongly influence preferential flow, and that tree roots can create or alter those structures [N5-F4]. This implies that root distribution, soil texture, and the presence of macropores can amplify the leaching-reduction effect [N5-F4]. However, the evidence base has important limitations and exceptions. First, the meta-analytic review notes that N2O and NO emissions vary across agroforestry practices, and that NO emissions are similar to monocropping in some contexts, so nitrogen management is not universally straightforward [N3-F1]. Second, the global synthesis on soil gross N cycling notes that ecosystem N cycling patterns are highly variable and that no single general pattern can be applied broadly across terrestrial ecosystems [N3-F2]. This means that the reduction in leaching is not guaranteed everywhere; it depends on local soil type, climate, and land use . Third, the direct intercropping study is specific to eastern Canada and clay loam soil, so its results may not generalize directly to sandy, dry, or highly disturbed soils [N3-R5]. Finally, the broader evidence on preferential flow shows that high macroporosity can reduce the stained area ratio in tracer experiments, but it can also create faster, more localized preferential flow [N5-F4]. This means that tree roots can reduce leaching in some cases, but they may also create faster transport pathways in others, depending on soil structure and root architecture [N5-F4]. ---## 5) Integrated conclusion Nitrogen uptake by tree roots in agroforestry intercropping systems helps reduce subsoil nitrogen leaching through several mechanisms: - **Direct uptake**: Tree roots absorb nitrate, ammonium, and organic nitrogen sources, reducing the amount available to leach [N1-R3][N1-R4]. - **Interception and retention**: Deeper root systems and root architecture allow tree roots to intercept nitrogen in the subsoil, while active root activity and belowground interactions enhance nitrogen retention [N4-R1][N4-R4][N2-R1][N2-R4]. - **Belowground environment change**: Tree-root biomass and litter inputs enrich the soil nitrogen pool, while pruning and root distribution alter competition and facilitation between crops and trees, creating feedbacks that improve nitrogen cycling [N2-R4][N2-R1][N2-R2][N2-R3]. - **Interception of preferential flow**: Tree roots can create macropores and alter root distribution, which intercepts or redirects preferential flow and reduces leaching risk [N5-F4 ][N2-R2]. - **Soil structure and connectivity**: Soil structure and root distribution reduce leaching risk by modifying preferential flow connectivity and tortuosity [N5-F4]. At the same time, the evidence is context-dependent. The most direct studies and reviews show reduced subsoil nitrogen leaching under agroforestry and tree-root systems [N3-F1][N3-F2][N3-R5], but the effect is amplified by deep rooting, nearby cropland sources, and favorable soil conditions, while exceptions exist in sandy, dry, or highly disturbed soils and in systems where preferential flow may create faster transport pathways [N3-F1][N3-F2][N5-F4]. In short, agroforestry intercropping reduces subsoil nitrogen leaching because tree roots do more than just grow downward--they actively capture nitrogen, reshape the soil environment, and intercept preferential flow pathways, all of which make nitrogen less available to leach into deeper layers [N1-R3][N1-R4][N2-R4][N4-R1][N5-F4]. 

</node> 

Figure 21: Answerer final output: answer_final (N11) 

Citation Catalog Used by the Final Answer. 

ID Kind Node Title URL N1-R3 search N1 Molecular fundamentals of nitrogen uptake and transport in trees 

https://academic.oup.com/jxb/article/6 8/10/2489/3091614 

N1-R4 search N1 Nitrogen Journey in Plants: From Uptake to Metabolism, Stress ... 

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/ PMC10605003/ 

N2-R1 search N2 Belowground Dynamics Influence Nitrogen Cycling and Crop ... 

https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/s ustainable-food-systems/articles/10.3 389/fsufs.2021.705577/full 

N2-R2 search N2 Nitrogen Cycling and Root Dynamics in an Agroforestry System 

https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024 EGUGA..26.4555E/abstract 

N2-R3 search N2 Below-ground interactions in dryland agro-forestry 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/abs/pii/S0378112798003223 

N2-R4 search N2 Nitrogen dynamics in agroforestry systems. A review 

https://hal.science/hal-04140609/docu ment 

N3-F1 fetch N3 Nitrogen dynamics in agroforestry systems. A review 

https://link.springer.com/article/10.1 007/s13593-022-00791-7 

N3-F2 fetch N3 Expanding agroforestry can increase nitrate retention 

https://www.nature.com/articles/s43016 -022-00657-x 

N3-R5 search N3 Reduced soil nutrient leaching following the establishment of tree ... 

https://www.researchgate.net/publicati on/225134004_Reduced_soil_nutrient_lea ching_following_the_establishment_of_t ree-based_intercropping_systems_in_ea stern_Canada 

N4-R1 search N4 Root phenotypes for improved nitrogen cap-ture 

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/ PMC11420291/ 

N4-R4 search N4 What Is Root System Architecture and Why Does It Matter? 

https://cid-inc.com/blog/what-is-roo t-system-architecture-and-why-does-i t-matter-in-plants/ ID Kind Node Title URL N5-F4 fetch N5 Characterization of preferential flow and transport pathways under farmland with dif-ferent land uses 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/abs/pii/S0167198725001278 

N5-R1 search N5 Characterization of preferential flow and transport pathways under ... 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/abs/pii/S0167198725001278 

N5-R2 search N5 Characteristics of Preferential Flow Paths and Their Impact on ... 

https://www.pjoes.com/pdf-89388-23248 ?filename=Characteristics-of-Prefer.pd f

Table 11: Citation catalog used by the final answer in the agroforestry nitrogen rollout. 

[Citations] - [N1-R4] Nitrogen Journey in Plants: From Uptake to Metabolism, Stress ... | https://pmc.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/articles/PMC10605003/ - [N1-R3] Molecular fundamentals of nitrogen uptake and transport in trees | https://academic.oup. com/jxb/article/68/10/2489/3091614 - [N4-R1] Root phenotypes for improved nitrogen capture - PMC - NIH | https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov /articles/PMC11420291/ - [N4-R4] What Is Root System Architecture and Why Does It Matter? | https://cid-inc.com/blog/what -is-root-system-architecture-and-why-does-it-matter-in-plants/ - [N5-F4] Characterization of preferential flow and transport pathways under farmland with different land uses - ScienceDirect | https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/ S0167198725001278 - [N2-R1] Belowground Dynamics Influence Nitrogen Cycling and Crop ... | https://www.frontiersin. org/journals/sustainable-food-systems/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2021.705577/full - [N2-R4] Nitrogen dynamics in agroforestry systems. A review - HAL | https://hal.science/hal -04140609/document - [N2-R2] Nitrogen Cycling and Root Dynamics in an Agroforestry System - ADS | https://ui.adsabs. harvard.edu/abs/2024EGUGA..26.4555E/abstract - [N2-R3] Below-ground interactions in dryland agroforestry - ScienceDirect | https://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0378112798003223 - [N5-R2] Characteristics of Preferential Flow Paths and Their Impact on ... | https://www.pjoes. com/pdf-89388-23248?filename=Characteristics-of-Prefer.pdf - [N5-R1] Characterization of preferential flow and transport pathways under ... | https://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167198725001278 - [N3-F1] Nitrogen dynamics in agroforestry systems. A review | https://link.springer.com/article /10.1007/s13593-022-00791-7 - [N3-F2] Expanding agroforestry can increase nitrate retention and mitigate the global impact of a leaky nitrogen cycle in croplands | https://www.nature.com/articles/s43016-022-00657-x - [N3-R5] Reduced soil nutrient leaching following the establishment of tree ... | https://www. researchgate.net/publication/225134004 _Reduced_soil_nutrient_leaching_following_the_establishment_of_tree-based_intercropping_systems_in_eastern_Canada 

Figure 22: Citation block appended to final answer